s15: Labyrinth Lord

## Converted from LL or AEC

Golem, Amber
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 6 [14]
Attacks: 2 claws (2d6), 1 bite (2d10)
Saving Throw: 7
Special: Track, see invis, Magic to-hit, immune elec/mental/poison/gas
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Morale: 12
Hoard Class: None
Challenge Level/XP: 0/0

These golems are made of petrified tree sap, and this golden stone is commonly
formed into the shape of dire wolves or large cats. They have the ability to
detect invisibility to a range of 60Ê, and are able to track any being.

All golems are unaffected by ordinary weapons. In addition, golems have no
true intelligence, and are thus unaffected by hold, charm, or sleep spells.
Since they are not truly alive, they are unaffected by poison or gases.

Golem, Bone
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [18]
Attacks: 4 weapons
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Magic to-hit, Immune fire/cold/elec/mental/poison/gas
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Morale: 12
Hoard Class: None
Challenge Level/XP: 0/0

Attack 2 opponents at once, 2 times each.

All golems are unaffected by ordinary weapons. In addition, golems have no
true intelligence, and are thus unaffected by hold, charm, or sleep spells.
Since they are not truly alive, they are unaffected by poison or gases.

Ghost
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 20
Attacks: age 1d4x10 years
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Fear, Magic Jar, magic/special to hit
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaotic
Morale: 10
Hoard Class: IX, XIX
Challenge Level/XP: 0/3,100

Ghosts are so terrifying that any being seeing one ages 10 years and flees as
with a fear spell for 2d6 turns. A save versus spells negates the effect. The
divine confidence belonging to clerics of 6th level or higher makes them
immune.  Beings of 8 HD or levels receive a +2 bonus to save. Ghosts usually
attack via magic jar within a range of 60'.

Ghosts may be attacked directly, whether physically or by spell, only by
beings that are on spirit plane. 12AC in this case.

A ghost may partially materialize and attack a victim physically. A successful
attack ages a victim by. Beings killed in this manner may not be
reincarnated, raised or resurrected.


Demon, Babau
Hit Dice: 7+10
Armor Class: -3
Attacks:
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4+1), 1 horn (2d4) or weapon+4
Saving Throw: 7
Special: 1/2 damage cut/pierce, vuln cold-iron, 9lvl thief
Move: 16
Alignment: Chaotic
Morale: 10
Hoard Class: XXI
XP: 1,700

These 7' tall demons have ebony flesh that clings closely to their
skeleton, appearing almost like a leathery corpse. They have a
single curving horn that emerges from the back of their heads.
Babau demons prefer to attack with weapons from a distance
when possible, and have STR 19 which grants bonuses to
attacks and damage with some weapons. A slimy red jelly coats
the babau's skin when in combat, reducing damage by 50%
from cutting and stabbing weapons. Babau suffer damage from
ordinary weapons, and +2 damage from weapons of iron.

These demons have the abilities of a thief of 9th level.
Additionally, any creature within 20' that looks into a babau's
glowing red eyes must succeed in a saving throw versus spells or
be affected as if from a Ray of Enfeeblement. They have the
following spell-like abilities, usable at will: darkness 10' radius,
dispel magic, fear (as the wand of fear, by touch), fly, levitate,
polymorph self, and heat metal. In addition, a babau may gate
(25% probability of success) another babau demon.
