s15: Swords & Wizardry Core Rules, Copyright 2008, Matthew J. Finch\nMonster Compendium: 0e, Copyright 2008, Matthew J. Finch

AARDVARK, GIANT
Giant aardvarks resemble their smaller cousins, with a long, pig-like snout, rabbit-like ears, and a kangaroo-like tail.  Instead of digging for termites like the normal aardvark, giant aardvarks, which can measure as large as twenty feet in length, tend to dig into cottages and subterranean burrows for large prey such as humans, goblins, and ankhegs.  The giant aardvark’s tongue is ten feet long, and is used to suck prey into the aardvark’s mouth.  A successful hit with the tongue forces the target to make a saving throw or be yanked into the aardvark’s mouth and swallowed.  The monster can be attacked from within (at an AC of 9[10]) but only with a short weapon such as a dagger.  Anyone inside the aardvark’s stomach takes 1d6 points of damage per round as he is digested. Giant aardvarks don’t eat more than a couple of people before they lose interest.
Giant Aardvark: HD 9; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 tongue (swallows), 2 claws (1d8); Save 6; Move 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Swallow whole.

ABOLETH
The aboleth is a revolting fish-like amphibian, primarily subterranean, roughly the size of a killer whale.  It vaguely resembles a catfish, but has four long tentacles and four orifices along its belly.  The tentacles can be used to drag its bulk across dry land.  These horrid abominations are extremely intelligent: an aboleth can cast charm monster three times per day, and create a phantasmal force three times per day.  In the water, an aboleth surrounds itself with a cloud of mucus that requires anyone inhaling it to make a saving throw or become unable to breathe air for 3 hours.  Finally, the slime on an aboleth’s tentacles causes disease if a saving throw fails.  Those afflicted suffer a change to their skin, which must be immersed in water every hour, or the victim suffers 1d6 points of damage.
Aboleth: HD 9; AC 3[16]; Atk 4 tentacles (1d6 + slime); Save 6; Move 9 (swim 12); CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Charm monster (3/day), Phantasmal force (3/day), Mucus cloud in water (save or cannot breathe air for 3 hours), special disease upon successful hit (save or must be immersed in water every hour).

AIR GUST
These minor elementals from the plane of Air resemble little whirlwinds. Although no more than a few feet in height and width, these tiny tornadoes can easily send the bulkiest adventurer flying.
The victim of a successful hit by an air gust has a 2 in 6 chance of being knocked down (GMs may wish to modify the roll to take into account exceptional strength).
The violent air gusts that make up this elemental's form (and give it its name) make missile/ranged attacks difficult and afford the elemental a bonus of 2 to AC.  (Contributed by Skathros).
Air Gust: HD 3; AC 4[15]; Atk Wind Blast (1d6+1 - Range up to 15ft.); Save 14; Move 12 (18 fly); CL/XP 4/120; Special: -2 [+2] to AC vs. missile attacks.

ALLIP
Allips are shadowy, incorporeal undead that mutter and speak with the voice of madness from beyond the grave.  The voice acts as a Suggestion spell upon anyone hearing the quiet mutterings: the suggestions of an allip are usually senseless but sinister.  The allip’s touch does not deal damage, but causes the victim to lose 1d4 points of wisdom.  If a victim’s wisdom falls to 0, it dies and will become an allip within 2d6 days.  Allips can only be hit with magical or silver weapons.
Allip: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 strike (no damage, 1d4 points of wisdom lost); Move (fly 6); Save 13; CL/XP 7/600; Special: drains wisdom, hypnosis.

##Worker Amphoron
##Amphorons of Yothri are mechanisms created by the Artificers of that plane (see, “Artificers of Yothri”) using their strange magic-science.  Amphorons on the material plane are physical projections of a model that remains on Yothri – the Artificer’s mind, possibly using a lens apparatus of some kind, projects the device into the material plane, where it has a physical reality.  However, the projection can fail, and the Artificer’s control of more than one Amphoron at a time depends on his connection to a single, controlling Amphoron.  If the Artificer attempts to switch his mental connection from one Amphoron to another, the process takes 1d6 rounds to complete.  In any given round, any Amphoron has a 1 in 6 chance to “flicker,” due to a momentary interruption of the connection across time and space.  While flickering, the Amphoron cannot be attacked, and cannot inflict damage.  However, it regains 1 hit point when it rematerializes.  A flickering Amphoron is visible as a faint, static-shrouded shape.  In the following round, the Amphoron reappears (unless it fails a second roll of the d6).  The controlling Amphoron has only a 1 in 20 chance of flickering, but if it does so, all of the Amphorons under its control will flicker.  Any Amphoron can be used as the controller, but a single controller cannot control more than six other Amphorons, and an Artificer can only project his mind to one controller at a time.  Thus, unless the Artificer has projected some apparatus (the possibilities are many, and left to the referee’s creativity) to allow remote controllers or auto-controls, the maximum number of Amphorons encountered at time is seven (six controlled and one controller).  When the Artificer’s nefarious schemes on the material plane are complete, he will likely not bother to disintegrate his Amphorons, so their material substance will remain on the material plane, operating randomly, remaining completely inert, or proceeding independently with their rudimentary intelligence.  All Amphorons have a metallic, jointed shell; their insides are filled with wires and a gel-like flesh which allows the mental connection with the distant reality of Yothri, and also gives the creature its basic intelligence.  There are three varieties of Amphoron, although the referee could design others with little effort. (Contributed by Matt Finch; first appeared in Knockspell Magazine #1).
##Worker Amphorons are just smaller than a human, and move with crab-like legs (although they can levitate for up to 3 rounds once per day, if need be).  As with other Amphorons, they have a 1 in 6 chance of flickering unless used as a controller by the Artificer.  In addition to the chance of flickering, a worker Amphoron may randomly belch out arcs of electricity, inflicting 1hp damage to anyone within 10ft (in addition to its other actions).
##Worker Amphoron: HD 2; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 pincer-arms (1d6); Save 16; Move 9; CL/XP 4/120; Special: magic resistance 25%, immune to piercing weapons, chance of flickering, chance of electrical belch.
##
##Warrior Amphoron
##Amphorons of Yothri are mechanisms created by the Artificers of that plane (see, “Artificers of Yothri”) using their strange magic-science.  Amphorons on the material plane are physical projections of a model that remains on Yothri – the Artificer’s mind, possibly using a lens apparatus of some kind, projects the device into the material plane, where it has a physical reality.  However, the projection can fail, and the Artificer’s control of more than one Amphoron at a time depends on his connection to a single, controlling Amphoron.  If the Artificer attempts to switch his mental connection from one Amphoron to another, the process takes 1d6 rounds to complete.  In any given round, any Amphoron has a 1 in 6 chance to “flicker,” due to a momentary interruption of the connection across time and space.  While flickering, the Amphoron cannot be attacked, and cannot inflict damage.  However, it regains 1 hit point when it rematerializes.  A flickering Amphoron is visible as a faint, static-shrouded shape.  In the following round, the Amphoron reappears (unless it fails a second roll of the d6).  The controlling Amphoron has only a 1 in 20 chance of flickering, but if it does so, all of the Amphorons under its control will flicker.  Any Amphoron can be used as the controller, but a single controller cannot control more than six other Amphorons, and an Artificer can only project his mind to one controller at a time.  Thus, unless the Artificer has projected some apparatus (the possibilities are many, and left to the referee’s creativity) to allow remote controllers or auto-controls, the maximum number of Amphorons encountered at time is seven (six controlled and one controller).  When the Artificer’s nefarious schemes on the material plane are complete, he will likely not bother to disintegrate his Amphorons, so their material substance will remain on the material plane, operating randomly, remaining completely inert, or proceeding independently with their rudimentary intelligence.  All Amphorons have a metallic, jointed shell; their insides are filled with wires and a gel-like flesh which allows the mental connection with the distant reality of Yothri, and also gives the creature its basic intelligence.  There are three varieties of Amphoron, although the referee could design others with little effort. (Contributed by Matt Finch; first appeared in Knockspell Magazine #1).
##Warrior Amphorons are usually used to protect Worker Amphorons, or in situations where the Artificer’s schemes involve violence.  They have a flamethrower which is in constant operation, allowing the Amphoron to shoot a line of flame at a single target up to 100ft away in addition to its other attacks.  The flame inflicts 1d6 damage (saving throw for half damage).
##Warrior Amphoron: HD 5; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 pincer arms (1d6+2); Save 12; Move 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: magic resistance 25%, immune to piercing weapons, chance of flickering, flamethrower.
##
##Juggernaut Amphoron
##The Juggernaut Amphoron is a harvester/processor the size of a semi-attached trailer truck, with a moving crane mounted on its back and two huge circular saws mounted on its articulated arms.  If the Juggernaut’s crane hits an opponent, the victim is lifted up into the air over the Juggernaut’s processing hatch, and dropped automatically in the following round.  If the crane hits, a saving throw is permitted to escape the its grasp unless the target is wearing metal armor, in which case no saving throw is allowed (the crane contains a backup magnet).  Anyone dropped into the processing hatch is processed within 1d4 rounds into a small brick.
##Juggernaut Amphoron: HD 10; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 whirling blades (2d6+2) or crane; Save 5; Move 9; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: magic resistance 25%, crane, chance of flickering.

Carpet, Animated
This description is only one possible interpretation of an animated carpet, of course.  This version of an animated carpet attacks for no damage, but if the target is hit and fails a saving throw, the carpet holds him, struggling, until he succeeds at a saving throw.
Animated Carpet: HD 1; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 (no damage); Move 6; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Grab.

Chair, Animated
This version of an animated chair bumps against its opponents, with a successful hit causing the target to fall to the ground and take 1hp damage.
Animated Chair: HD 1; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 bump (save or fall); Move 12; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Knocks over.

ANKHEG
Ankhegs are huge insects, 10 to 20ft long, resembling grasshoppers with vicious mandibles.  They burrow through the ground, often in farmlands as well as in caverns.  Once per day, an ankheg can squirt digestive acids for 5d6 points of damage (save for half), but this is a defense not used in normal hunting.
Ankheg (3HD): HD 3; AC 2[17] underside 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (3d6); Move 12 (burrow 6); Save 14; CL/XP 4/120XP; Special: Spits acid 5d6 (1/day, save for half)
Ankheg (4HD): HD 4; AC 2[17] underside 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (3d6); Move 12 (burrow 6); Save 13; CL/XP 5/240XP; Special: Spits acid 5d6 (1/day, save for half)
Ankheg (5HD): HD 5; AC 2[17] underside 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (3d6); Move 12 (burrow 6); Save 12; CL/XP 6/400XP; Special: Spits acid 5d6 (1/day, save for half)
Ankheg (6HD): HD 6; AC 2[17] underside 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (3d6); Move 12 (burrow 6); Save 11; CL/XP 7/600XP; Special: Spits acid 5d6 (1/day, save for half)
Ankheg (7HD): HD: 7; AC: 2[17] underside 4[15]; Atk: 1 bite (3d6); Move: 12 (burrow 6); Save: 9; CL/XP: 8/800XP; Special: Spits acid 5d6 (1/day, save for half)
Ankheg (8HD): HD: 8; AC: 2[17] underside 4[15]; Atk: 1 bite (3d6); Move: 12 (burrow 6); Save: 8; CL/XP: 9/1100XP; Special: Spits acid 5d6 (1/day, save for half).

##ANT, GIANT
##Giant ants live in vast subterranean hives tunneled through soil and even stone.  A hive can hold as many as 100 ants, in a worker-to-warrior ratio of 5:1.  The poison of a warrior ant does 2d6 points of damage if a saving throw is failed, 1d4 points of damage if the saving throw succeeds.
##Giant Worker Ant: HD 2; AC 3[16]; Atk Bite (1d6); Move 18; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.
##Giant Warrior Ant: HD 3; AC 3[16]; Atk Bite (1d6+ poison); Move 18; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Poison 2d6 (save for 1d4 only).
##Giant Queen Ant: HD 10; AC 3[16]; Atk Bite (1d6); Move 3; Save 3; CL/XP 8/800; Special: None.

APE, FLYING
Flying apes are somewhat larger and more muscular than gorillas.  Most have bat wings, but some have feathered bird-wings.  If a flying ape hits with both arms, it can either rend its foe for an additional 1d6 points of damage or gain a good enough hold to carry the foe into the air (to drop later, or deliver the victim to an evil overlord, as applicable).  As with gorillas, most flying apes are of far less than human intelligence, but more intelligent (and often chaotic) ones are not uncommon.
Ape, Flying: HD 5; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 hands (1d4), 1 bite (1d6); Move 9 (fly 18); Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Rend or carry airborne.

APE, GORILLA
If a gorilla hits with both arms, it will crush and rend the victim for an additional 1d6 points of damage.  Some gorillas, especially those living near places of eerie magic, might become carnivorous and seek out human prey with abnormal cunning and rudimentary intelligence.
Ape, Gorilla: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 hands (1d3), 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Hug and rend.

AQUEOUS ORB
Aqueous orbs are bubble creatures that levitate above the surface of the water, leaving a long, tube-like feeding tail dangling into the water below. Liquid and nutrients are pulled up through the tail to the bubble-like body, which thrives on rotting carrion in the surrounding water. An aqueous orb glows with green luminescence when attacking: those who fail a saving throw will walk toward the orb, enter the water, and most likely drown. The feeding-tail can also be used as a weapon, piercing foes for 1d4 hit points of damage and inflicting 1d4 points of damage automatically thereafter, as it sucks blood from the victim. An aqueous orb is immune to all but piercing weapons; the feeding-tail is immune to all but slashing weapons. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Aqueous Orb: HD 3; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 feeding-tail (1d4); Save 15; Move 3; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Sucks blood, luminescence, immune to weapon types.

ARANEA
An aranea is an intelligent, shapechanging spider with sorcerous powers. In its natural form, an aranea resembles a big spider, with a humpbacked body a little bigger than a human torso. It has fanged mandibles like a normal spider. Two small arms, each about 2 feet long, lie below the mandibles. Each arm has a hand with four many-jointed fingers and a double-jointed thumb. An aranea weighs about 150 pounds. A hump on its back houses its brain.
Aranea can cast webs at a single opponent at a range up to 40ft (saving throw).  The victim is entangled, but can break free within 1d6 rounds.  These horrid creatures are spellcasters, able to cast one second level and two first level magic-user spells.  Usually, an aranea is prepared with 2 charm person spells and a mirror image spell; or, alternatively, with 1 charm person, 1 sleep spell, and invisibility.
Aranea: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6 + poison); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Webs, Spells.

ARCANIX
Arcanixes (also known as Spell-Stealers), resemble tall, gaunt humans with bluish skin and pointed ears. They are extraplanar creatures that foray into the mortal realms in their obsessive search for magic. They prize magical items above all else, but spellbooks and arcane lore (as well as spellcasters themselves) are also sought to take back to their home plane.
There are three types of Arcanix: Arcanix Minor (3HD), Arcanix Major (6HD) and Arcanix Greater (12HD). If an arcanix is encountered bearing a weapon, it is a near certainty that the weapon is magical in nature (the referee should base the weapon in accordance with the type of arcanix).
An arcanix that can successfully touch a spell-caster may steal spell levels up to its own number of hit dice. Example: An Arcanix Minor (3HD) may steal a third level spell from a magic-user, or three 1st level spells, or a 2nd and a 1st level spell. The spell-caster is allowed a saving throw to negate this effect. If the attack is successful (and the save fails) the stolen spells leave the magic-user's memory (until he can re-memorize them again), and the arcanix may use them as if he had memorized them. The number of times per day that an Arcanix may use this ability depends on the type of Arcanix; Minor 1/day, Major 3/day, Greater 6/day.
Arcanixes possess the following spell-like Abilities: Detect Magic 3/day, Read Magic 3/day, Dispel Magic 2/day, Dimension Door 1/day. An arcanix may teleport to or from its home plane once (3HD), twice (6HD), or 3 times (12HD) per week. (Contributed by Skathros).
Arcanix, Minor: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon, or special ability, or spell; Save 14; Move 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Spells, Spell-Stealing, Teleport.
Arcanix, Major: HD 6; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon, or special ability, or spell; Save 11; Move 12; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Spells, Spell-Stealing, Teleport.
Arcanix, Greater: HD 12; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon, or special ability, or spell; Save 3; Move 12; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: Spells, Spell-Stealing, Teleport.

ARCHER-TREE
Archer-trees are a species of walking pine tree.  Some of the tree’s needles are extremely long, although this is not easy to notice from afar.  The tree’s animated branches can throw 1d4 of these longer needles per round to a range of 100ft.  The needles contain a sedative poison that paralyzes victims for 3d6 turns (saving throw negates).
Archer-Tree: HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk 1d4 needles (1d6); Move 1; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Paralysis.

ARTIFICER OF YOTHRI
The artificers of Yothri are tall and skeletal, a construction of dark-hued metalloid bones acting as the framework for artificial tubes and organs.  They wear hoods and long, black robes – perhaps a necessity of the dead world they inhabit in a distant and eroding reality.  Their palaces are of baroque green glass and alien metals, twisting in unnatural shapes, domes, and bubbles.  The artificers are mutually hostile, each coveting the others’ resources and knowledge.  It is remotely possible that player characters might be kidnapped to serve an artificer by attacking the citadel of one of the others in the barren, suppurating wastelands of Yothri itself.  An artificer employs the Science of Yothri, which is a mix of psychic powers, magic, and technology impossible to achieve outside the physical realities of Yothri itself.  Rather than manifesting in spells, the Science of Yothri allows the Artificer to use certain powers, some mental, some magical, as follows:
Psychic powers: at will, (in conjunction with a physical attack if desired), the artificer can use telekinesis to lift up to 300 pounds of weight, create or maintain a “double vision” effect similar to a singe mirror image per the spell, increase magic resistance to 80%, maintain a mental connection with an amphoron in another plane, or work to establish a connection with an amphoron in another plane (the mental connection with amphorons is described below).
Magical powers: in conjunction with a psychic power (but not with physical attacks), the Artificer may create one of the following effects using the Science of Yothri: (1) once per day, the Artificer can cast charm person in a cone shape 60ft long and reaching 60ft wide at extreme range, (2) three times per day, the Artificer can cast a spell to cause metal poisoning in the target’s bloodstream (a saving throw applies), rendering the victim helpless with pain and causing death within 2d6 rounds unless the poison is counteracted. (Contributed by Matt Finch; first appeared in Knockspell Magazine #1).
Artificer of Yothri: HD 10; AC 2[17]; Atk claw (1d10+1); Save 5; Move 15; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: Magic Resistance 50% (80%), psychic powers, magic powers.

ASSASSIN VINE
The assassin vine is a semi-mobile plant that collects its own grisly fertilizer by grabbing and crushing animals and depositing the carcasses near its roots.  A mature plant consists of a main vine, about 20 feet long. Smaller vines up to 5 feet long branch off from the main vine about every 6 inches.
An assassin vine can move about, albeit very slowly, but usually stays put unless it needs to seek prey in a new vicinity.
An assassin vine growing underground usually generates enough offal to support a thriving colony of mushrooms and other fungi, which spring up around the plant and help conceal it.
An assassin vine can animate plants in the near vicinity (about 30ft), and these plants will immobilize anyone failing a saving throw.
Assassin Vine: HD 7; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 vine (1d6+1); Move 1; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: animate plants.

ATHATCH
The offspring of a demon and a giant, an athatch is a monster about 14ft tall, weighing about 2 tons, with 1d3 eyes, 1d3 arms, and 1d3 legs. An odd-numbered eye is located in its forehead, an odd-numbered arm is located in the middle of its chest, and an odd-numbered leg is located behind its haunch. It is ambidextrous (if it has two or more arms) and can wield a weapon in any or all of its hands. They use massive weapons, usually great clubs (2d6 damage). An athatch cannot normally bite opponents man-sized or smaller in melee, but may (if victory seems likely) toy with its victims by grasping and lifting an opponent with a free hand (a to-hit roll is still required) and then biting on the following round. The poisonous spit of the athatch requires a saving throw at -2 or the victim becomes helplessly nauseated for 1d3 turns; the athatch also can spit this poison up to 10ft.
Because of their demonic heritage, athatch have 60ft darkvision and the following spell-like abilities they can use once per hour: darkness (5ft radius), levitate, and phantasmal force. Once per day an athatch can polymorph self into the form of another giant. They subtract 1 point of damage per die from cold, fire, gas, and lightning attacks against them. (Contributed by Scott Casper).
Athatch: HD 11; AC 3 [16]; Atk 1 or 2 weapons (3d6 or 2d6/2d6)/1 bite (1d6+1); Move 15; CL/XP 15/4300; Special: Poison (nausea) spit, darkness, levitate, phantasmal force, reduced damage from cold, fire, gas, electricity, polymorph into other giant type.

AZER
Azers are dwarflike beings native to the Elemental Plane of Fire. They wear kilts of brass, bronze, or copper, and bear broad-headed spears or well-crafted hammers in combat. Their attacks deal +1 damage due to their intense heat.  They are immune to fire damage.  Stats are for the normal azer; sergeants and leaders can be much larger and will have more hit dice.
Azer: HD 2; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6+1); Save 16; Move 12; CL/XP 2/30; Special: +1 heat damage, immune to fire.

BABOON
Baboons are vicious pack hunters, usually led by a stronger-than-normal alpha male.  They might be susceptible to the influence of ancient and evil powers.
Baboon: HD 1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.
Baboon (alpha male): HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

BABOON, GIANT
Giant baboons stand 8ft tall on two legs, about twice the size of a normal baboon.  As with normal baboons, they are susceptible to the influence of ancient and evil powers.
Baboon, Giant: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d8); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.
Baboon, Giant (alpha male): HD 4; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d8+1); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

BADGER, GIANT
These subterranean predators are the size of a full-grown human, and quite aggressive when defending their territory.
Giant Badger: HD 3; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 Claws (1d3), bite (1d6); Move 6; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

BAG OF TEETH
A bag of teeth is a deceptive-looking little critter. At first glance, the creature looks like a pouch of coins. Its insides, seen when one opens the "pouch", resemble coins of gold. As one inserts his hand within the creature to retrieve the gold within, the critter’s razor-sharp teeth spring open around the pouches opening, and clamp down on the victim's wrist. The bite causes 1d6 points of damage, with 1 hp being lost for every subsequent round due to continuous bleeding until the creature is killed. (Contributed by Skathros).
Bag of Teeth: HD 1; AC 9[10]; Atk Bite (1d6+1/round); Save 17; Move 0; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

BANSHEE
Banshees are horrid fey (or undead) creatures that live in swamps and other desolate places.  Their shriek (once per day) necessitates a saving throw versus death or the hearer will die in 2d6 rounds.  They can travel over water and other terrain as if it were land, but crossing running water causes them to lose their magic resistance for 3d6 hours.  They look like gaunt humans (male or female) with long, stringy hair and glowing yellow eyes.  They often wear hooded cloaks.  At the referee’s discretion, such creatures might be undead rather than faerie-folk, and are considered Type 9 undead for turning purposes.
Banshee: HD 7; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 claw (1d8); Move (fly 12); Save 9; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Magic or silver to hit; magic resistance 49%; shriek of death; Immune to enchantments

BARRACUDA
Barracudas are fast, shark-like fish.  They are smaller than most sharks, but hunt in groups.
Barracuda: HD 1; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d8); Move (swim 24); Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

BASILISK
Basilisks are great lizards whose gaze turns to stone anyone meeting its eye (one way of resolving this: fighting without looking incurs a –4 penalty to hit).  If the basilisk’s own gaze is reflected back at it, it has a 10% chance to force the basilisk into a saving throw against being turned to stone itself.
Basilisk: HD 6; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Petrifying gaze.

BASILISK, DESERT
Desert basilisks appear to be fat cobra snakes, about 20ft long and 2ft in diameter, with four skinny legs that help propel it along the ground, and horns all around the top of its head. These basilisks are extremely poisonous—so much so that even their gaze inflicts 1d6 points of damage unless those meeting its eye make a successful saving throw. Anyone avoiding the basilisk's gaze attacks with a -4 penalty to hit and damage. In addition, a desert basilisk can spit its poison up to 20ft as a missile attack for 1d12 points of poison damage. The desert basilisk's bite inflicts 1d4 points of physical damage and the poison inflicts an additional 1d12 points. A saving throw negates the basilisk's poison, but anyone who purposely comes into physical contact with a basilisk’s hide automatically takes 1d6 points of poison damage. Any weapon that strikes a desert basilisk becomes envenomed and does and additional 1d12 points of poison damage to the next target it hits.
Desert basilisks are solitary monsters, indigenous to desert regions, but are sometimes transported elsewhere by wizards looking for exotic guardians. (Contributed by Scottenkainen).
Basilisk, Desert: HD 4+4; AC 3 [16]; Atk 1 bite or 1 spit (1d4+1d12 or 1d12); Move 9; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Poisonous gaze (non-lethal), spit poison (non-lethal), poisonous bite (non-lethal).

BAT MONSTER
These creatures attack with claws as well as a bite.  They are twice the size of a man, with a tremendous wingspan.  Fearful peasants might even mistake them for small dragons when they fly by night.
Bat, Giant Monster: HD 8; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (2d8), 2 claws (1d6); Move 4 (fly 18); Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: None.

BAT, GIANT
Giant bats are massive, man-sized cousins of the bat; they do not suck blood, but their bite is nonetheless deadly.  One in ten carries disease.
Giant Bat: HD 4; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d10); Move 4 (fly 18); Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: 10% chance of disease.

BEAR, BLACK
If a black bear hits with both claws, it hugs for an additional 1d8 hit points of damage.
Bear, Black: HD 4+1; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d6); Move 9; Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Hug.

BEAR, GRIZZLY
Very large brown bears, grizzlies hug for an additional 2d6 points of damage (if hitting with both claw attacks) and can automatically maintain the hold, crushing the victim and continuing attempts to bite as well.
Bear, Grizzly: HD 6; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (1d10); Move 9; Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Hug.

BEAR, CAVE OR POLAR
Prehistoric bears and polar bears are even larger than a grizzly bear.  When hitting with both claws, they hug for 3d6 points of damage.
Bear, Cave/Polar: HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d6+1), 1 bite (1d10+1); Move 12; Save 9; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Hug.

BEETLE, GIANT ARCANE
A gargantuan beetle with a carapace of mirror-like silver. Arcane Beetles are ideally suited as mounts for warring against magic-users and other arcane spellcasters due to their innate abilities.
Any spell cast upon an Arcane Beetle, be it from spells cast or magic items, is immediately cast back at the wizard. (Contributed by Skathros).
Beetle, Giant Arcane: HD 5; AC 3[16]; Atk pincers (2d6); Save 12; Move 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Arcane Reflection.

BEETLE, GIANT FIRE
A giant fire beetle’s oily light-glands glow reddishly, and continue to give off light for 1d6 days after they are removed (shedding light in a 10ft radius).
Beetle, Giant Fire: HD 1+3; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d4+2); Move 12; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Light glands.

BEETLE, GIANT (Basic Form)
These stats are for a generic giant beetle about five feet long.  Larger or smaller beetles might have different statistics or have unusual abilities.
Giant Beetle: HD 3; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 bite (3d6); Move 9; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

BEETLE, GIANT HUHU
This large winged beetle has a brown and yellow-striped carapace, horny black antennae and powerful jaws. It's barbed legs hook relentlessly into the victim's hair, fur or clothing.  It is attracted to light sources.  The pale yellow HuHu grubs are extremely nutritious and taste like peanut butter. (Contributed by Mudguard).
Beetle, Giant HuHu: HD 1+3;AC 4[15]; Atk Bite (2d6); Move 9 (18 fly); Save 17; CL/XP: 2/30; Special: Grip, Flight.

BEHIR
The behir is a serpentine monster that can slither like a snake or use its dozen legs to move with considerable speed. A behir is about 40 feet long and weighs about 4,000 pounds. Most are a deep blue color.  Behirs attack by biting, and will swallow prey whole on a natural roll of 20.  They also lash their bodies around prey (to hit), and on the first round following this attack they can bring 6 claws into play (6 attacks, 1d6 hit points per attack).
Behirs also have a breath weapon – they can spit a bolt of lightning once per 10 rounds, inflicting 24 points of damage (2 per hit die, for smaller or larger behirs).  A successful saving throw indicates half damage.
Behir: HD 12; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d8); Move 15; Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Constrict and claw, lightning breath.

BIRHAAKAMEN (Wild Bird-men)
Birhaakmen are bird-men, entirely feathered, with beaks and clawed hands at their wing-joints.  They live in tribal aeries and are generally not civilized.  They carry javelins, and some of the more civilized aeries arm their warriors with spears and shields.  These more advanced bird-men may wear scraps of armor, increasing their AC to 4[15].
Birhaakaman: HD 1+3; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d2) and beak (1d3) or by weapon (1d8); Move 12 (Fly 18); Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Fly.

BLACK HUNTER (DARKLINGS)
Black Hunters, or darklings, as they are sometimes called, are 4ft tall, cannibalistic humanoids. They are jet black, hairless, and possess a wiry frame. Attacking a Black Hunter in dim light incurs a -3 penalty to hit. Doing so in total darkness sees the penalty increase to -5. Darklings, for their part, see perfectly in darkness.
Darklings may use the Darkness 15ft Radius spell twice per day. (Contributed by Scottenkainen).
Black Hunter: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 knife or dagger (1d4); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Darkness 15ft Radius.

BLACK PUDDING
Black puddings are amorphous globs with an acidic surface.  They are subterranean predators and scavengers.  Any weapon or armor contacting a black pudding will be eaten away by the acid as follows: weapon (1 hit by the weapon), chainmail or lesser armor (1 hit by pudding), plate mail (2 hits by pudding).  If a weapon or armor is magical, it can take an additional hit per +1 before being dissolved.
Pudding, Black: HD 10; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 attack (3d8); Move 6; Save 5; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Acidic surface, immune to cold, divides when hit with lightning.

BLINK DOG
Blink dogs are pack hunters, intelligent and usually friendly to those who are not of evil intent.  They can teleport short distances (without error) and attack in the same turn – in most cases (75%) a blink dog will be able to teleport behind an opponent and attack from the rear (with appropriate bonuses).
Blink Dog: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Teleport.

BOAR, WILD
 Boars continue to attack for two rounds after they are actually killed before they drop dead.  These stats might also be used for your “blue tusken-hogs of the Ymar Plains,” or whatever is appropriate for your campaign.
Boar, Wild: HD 3+3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 gore (3d4); Move 15; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: continue attacks 2 rounds after death.

BONE MOUND
When a nugget of pure chaos ends up in the material plane, the result can be a bone mound, a jelly-like creature that exudes a sticky film from its pores. At first glance, a bone mound appears to be a massive heap of bones and broken skeletal remains, for it picks up osseous material that sticks to the slime-beast's blob-like form, giving it the appearance of a pile of bones. This bone-collecting slime possesses a secondary ability that makes it a truly dangerous foe. In addition to the adhesive film it exudes, the piece of pure chaos at the bone mound's core gives it an innate ability to animate, partially, the bones that stick to it. The effects of this spell-like ability extend up to 2ft away from the creature's body. The bone mound can animate 1d6 of the bony remains that have adhered to it each round. Each of these animated body parts may attack once, inflicting 1d4 damage. A cleric may turn these newly living bits of skeletal remains as if they were Type 1 undead. The bone mound may shift its animate dead power from one set of bones to another at any time. The chaos nugget inside the mound, which looks like a bit of charcoal, is quite dangerous - it dissolves instantly into anyone who touches it, and the victim must make a saving throw at -2 or the nugget will re-form inside his body and he will become a bone mound himself in 1d6 days. (Contributed by Skathros).
Bone Mound: HD 10; AC 3[16]; Atk 1d6 claw/kick/bite (1d4 each); Move 6; Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Animate Dead, Multiple Attacks.

BORSIN (Ape Centaur)
A borsin is a creature with the head, arms, and upper body of an ape joined to the body and legs of a quadruped. The lower half may be that of a boar, equine, or hound; these may be a race of battle-beasts magically crossbred in antiquity. A borsin has a savage cunning, and is capable of problem-solving and setting crude traps. They do not use weapons or tools, or carry treasure, although pack leaders will drape themselves in the skins and furs of creatures they have killed – including humans and adventurers.
Borsin form packs led by the strongest member. They attack with two claws and a bite, and use pack tactics to drive opponents and prey into traps, kill zones, or natural hazards such as cliffs and ravines. If both its claws hit the same opponent, a borsin can hug and rend for an additional 2d6 points of damage. Borsin packs stake out their territory by making small cairns topped with the skulls of their kills, and patrol their borders regularly. Borsin are omnivorous and hardy, capable of surviving on plant matter, yet enjoying a fresh kill. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Borsin: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d4) and 1 bite (1d3); Move 15; Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Hug and rend.

BUGBEAR
These large, hairy, goblin-like humanoids are stealthier than their size would suggest, almost always getting the chance to surprise even alert opponents with a roll of 1-3 on a d6 (50%).  Bugbears stand from 7-8ft in height.
Bugbear: HD 3+1; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (2d4) or weapon (1d8+1); Move 9; Save 14; CL/XP 3/120; Special: Surprise opponents, 50% chance.

##BULETTE
##Bulettes, often called “landsharks,” resemble huge armadillos with wide, tooth-filled mouths.  They burrow beneath the ground, and surge upward to attack prey.  Bulettes can grow to be ten to fifteen feet long.  Horses are a favorite food of bulettes.
##Bulette: HD 9; AC –1[20]; Atk 2 claws (2d6), 1 bite (3d12); Move 15 (Burrow 3); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Burrow.

CAMEL
Camels can carry 600 pounds of weight.  They often have bad dispositions, and they spit.
Camel: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d2); Move 20; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

FLY, CARRION
A carrion fly is 5 feet long and resembles a large, white grub with wings and no legs. Its head has large black eyes and a small mouth ringed with four long tentacles. It attacks with its tentacles, attempting to paralyze its prey. Once its victim is paralyzed, it will land and begin vomiting digestive acids to melt the victim into a suitable meal of goo. It can also spit these digestive acids at its target from a distance.  (Contributed by the Lizard of Oz).
Fly, Carrion: HD 4; AC 7[12]; Atk 4 tentacles (paralyze) or 1 spit (2d4); Move 3 (fly 18); Save 13; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Paralyze, acid

CAT, FERAL UNDEAD
Feral undead cats look like they were created by zombie-raising magic, but they are actually things quite unlike normal animated undead such as skeletons or zombies.  These undead cats are possessed of an animal cunning akin to that of ghouls (although with less intelligence), and they are not slow moving as zombies are.  Like ghouls, they tend to form into packs.  If a person is scratched more than three times by undead feral cats (not necessarily the same one), he must make a saving throw or be paralyzed for 1d6 turns.  After the first set of three scratches, every subsequent scratch requires a saving throw.
Cat, Feral Undead: HD 1d4hp; AC 8[11]; Atk 2 claws (1hp); Move 12; Save 18; CL/XP B/10; Special Paralyzing scratch (after first 3 hits).

CATOBLEPAS
These medieval monsters resemble giant warthogs, but they are so hideous that their appearance can cause death (saving throw).  If the first glance doesn’t kill, each round of viewing the beast can still stun the viewer into immobility for 1d3 turns.
Catoblepas: HD 6; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Lethal appearance.

CATTLE
Cattle include oxen and cows.  Bulls inflict 1d8 points of damage instead of 1d6.
Cow/Ox: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 gore (1d6); Move 18; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

CAVE EEL
Cave eels burrow through stone with sharp teeth, but otherwise look like large eels.  They usually attack by reaching from their burrows in cave walls to bite.  In general, these creatures congregate in groups.
Cave eel: HD 2; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 1; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: strike from cave walls.

CENTAUR
Half man, half horse, centaurs are fierce warriors and well-known creatures of mythology.  The referee may choose any “version” of the centaur from myth or folklore for his campaign: some are evil, some aloof, and some are soothsayers.
Centaur: HD 4; AC 5[14] or 4[15] with shield; Atk 2 kicks (1d6) and weapon; Move 18; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: None.

CENTIPEDE (SWARM)
A centipede swarm is a group of about 5-10 normal (but big) centipedes.  The swarm’s attack (one attack for the group, as a 1HD monster) inflicts only 1hp of damage, but the poison injected by the centipedes is enough to cause paralysis for 1d3+1 rounds (saving throw).  The centipedes can be killed and/or shaken off in 1d6 rounds without rolling to hit (they are virtually impossible to kill with weapons).  Anyone helping to kill them subtracts a round from the time required.  Fire will dispel or kill a swarm (but would damage the person being attacked, as well).
Centipede Swarm: HD n/a; AC n/a; Atk 1 (1hp + non-lethal poison); Move 4; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: non-lethal poison.

##CENTIPEDE, GIANT
##Small (Lethal): Giant lethal centipedes of the small size inflict a lethal bite with a +4 saving throw, but inflict no damage if the saving throw is successful.
##Giant Centipede (small, lethal): HD 1d2hp; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (0 + poison); Move 13; Save 18; CL/XP 2/30; Special: poison bite (+4 save or die).
##
##Small (Non-Lethal): The non-lethal variety has larger pincers but its poison is not lethal (though it is deadly).  Failing a saving throw (at +4) against the poison of the non-lethal variety causes 1d4 rounds of crippling pain (the victim is helpless, as if asleep).  Additionally, the limb (roll 1d4) is temporarily crippled (treat as a disease) for 2d4 days.  A crippled leg reduces movement by 50%; a crippled shield arm cannot use weapon or shield; a crippled sword arm can only attack at –4.  A second bite on a leg reduces movement to one quarter normal, and a third bite to the legs reduces movement to 1ft per minute (prone, dragging oneself by the arms).
##Giant Centipede (small, non-lethal): HD 1d2hp; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (0 + poison); Move 13; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: non-lethal poison bite (+4 save).
##
##Man-sized: The man-sized giant centipede is a deadly predator with armored segments, a deadly bite, and a lethal (though relatively weak) poison.
##Giant Centipede (7ft): HD 2; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d8 + poison); Move 15; Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: poison bite (+6 save or die).
##
##Large: A twenty-foot long horror of chitin, multiple legs, and clashing pincers dripping with venom.
##Giant Centipede (20ft): HD 4; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 bite (3d8); Move 18; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: poison bite (+4 save or die).

CHALKEION (Men of Bronze)
The proud Men of Bronze are legendary for their martial prowess and ferocity. They appear as normal men (albeit unusually handsome and well proportioned normal men) with a deep reddish-brown skin tone and are typically armed and dressed in antique fashion. The chalkeions are the last remnants of a former age, and those few who remain make their living as mercenaries, for they crave battle above all things. Their flesh is not literally bronze, but it is exceptionally tough, giving them a natural armor class of 5[14]. In battle, they usually wear leather armor and shields (which improves their AC to 2[17]), carry spears and javelins, and do not typically ride horses. In melee chalkeions function as berserkers, gaining 2 attacks per round and never needing to check morale. Because of their fearlessness and strict discipline they are highly sought after as mercenaries, but it is also well known that the men of bronze place loyalty to their brethren and self preservation above their employers' interests and will not obey orders which they perceive as foolish or suicidal. For every 6 men of bronze encountered there will typically be a sergeant with 6 hit dice, for every 12 a lieutenant with 7 or 8 hit dice, and groups of 30 or more are typically led by a captain with 10-12 hit dice. (Contributed by Trent Foster).
Man of Bronze (hoplite): HD 5; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 by weapon (1d6); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: None.
Man of Bronze (sergeant): HD 6; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 by weapon (1d6); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: None.
Man of Bronze (lieutenant): HD 7; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 by weapon (1d6); Move 12; Save 9; CL/XP 7/600; Special: None.
Man of Bronze (captain): HD 11; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 by weapon (1d6); Move 12; Save 4; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: None.

CHAOS KNIGHT
The Chaos Knight appears to be a faintly glowing, ghostly suit of animated armour. It seems insubstantial, but has a definite physical presence. There are no features to be discerned within its helm, save for a dim blue glow. Intense cold radiates from the Chaos Knight; any fire within 20ft will be dampened or doused, and liquids will cool and turn to ice.
The mere touch of a Chaos Knight is freezing cold, chilling those it touches to the bone. It wields a sword in melee, drawing upon otherworldly might to inflict extra damage.
By concentrating for one round, a Chaos Knight may pass through solid objects such as a wall, leaving an icy outline where it has done so (3/day). It can cast Wall of Ice (3/day), cause shafts of ice to erupt from the ground (3/day), and open a portal similar to a Dimension Door spell (3/day). The portal remains open for up to 10 rounds, and anyone looking at it will see a kaleidoscopic passage of jagged energy bolts and whirling, ever-changing elemental matter. Any being other than the Chaos Knight that passes through the portal suffers 10 points of damage per round. The Chaos Knight may pass back and forth between the two end-points of the portal at will. It may also use Telekinesis once per day, and invoke a random spell effect twice per day.  The Chaos Knight is immune to mind-affecting magic, as well as attacks from non-magical weapons. Normal weapons with a Bless spell cast upon them can hit and damage a chaos knight. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Chaos Knight: HD 10; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 touch (1d6), or sword (1d8+8); Move 12 (4 fly); Save 5; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: Special dimension door, wall of ice, spikes of ice, pass through walls, telekinesis, random spell effect, immune to non-magical weapons.

CHIMERA
The chimera has three heads; one is the head of a goat, one the head of a lion, and one the head of a dragon.  Great wings rise from its lion-like body.  The dragon head can breathe fire (3 times per day) with a range of 50ft, causing 3d8 damage to anyone caught within the fiery blast (saving throw for half damage).
Chimera: HD 9; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 2 goat horns (1d4), 1 lion bite (2d4), dragon bite (3d4); Move 9 (Fly 18); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Breathes fire, flies.

CLAWED FIEND
Clawed fiends are 5ft tall, pale green humanoids. Their legs are short stumps and their hairless facial features carry a distinctive frog-like cast (large, bulbous eyes, wide mouth). This creature is so named because of its absurdly long arms which end in long, viciously sharp claws. The arms themselves extend to 5ft, with the claws reaching 2 to 3 feet. With such a long range, the clawed fiend isn't limited to attacking foes directly in front of it, but may also attack those up to 8ft away. Although clawed fiends can inflict devastating damage on their foes by way of their vicious claws, they are slow critters, and are penalized with a -1 to initiative rolls. Without the digits required for fine manipulation, clawed fiends are unable to employ weapons of any kind. (Contributed by Skathros).
Clawed Fiend: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 claws (1d8/1d8); Move 3; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

CLIESSID
The amphibious Cliessid are small, shelled humanoids with pincers in place of hands, three thick toes on each leg in a Y-shape, and a mass of writhing tentacles in place of a head. They stand no taller than a man's knee. Cliessids live in sluggish rivers, shallow streams, stagnant ponds, and sewer systems, and can move as fast in, or under, the water as on land. Some cities have imported and domesticated these creatures for use in sewer maintenance, but with mixed results, for cliessids are viciously hostile to any who invade their territory. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Cliessid: HD 1d4hp; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 pincers (1hp); Move 9 (9 swim); Save 18; CL/XP A/5; Special: None.

CORAL CLAMPER
This mollusk resembles a growth of rock or coral covered with several large (but still normal-looking) clams. When a swimmer nears it, however, the clamper lashes out with long, flexible arms of muscle for which the "clams" are the tips. These appendages encircle and crush prey, with the clam-like tip serving as a viciously biting mouth. A coral clamper normally has four appendages, and these grow to a length of 20ft. The clamper's body is protected by its hard, coral-like shell. If one of the appendages scores a hit, the victim must make a saving throw or be held helpless by the tentacle-like grasp. The clam-mouth at the end of the tentacle can attack while a victim is held, but cannot generally reach a victim other than the one held in the muscle-tentacle. (Contributed by Matt Finch)
Coral Clamper: HD 6; AC 2[17]; Atk 4 muscle-tentacles (1d6 + grab); Move 1; Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Grab victims.

CORPSE TREE
These stunted, gnarled trees look like worn down, time ravaged tree trunks ranging in height from 4 to 8 feet tall, with a corpse-like shape, arms stretched forth, budding from the trunk. Every corpse tree has a tree ghost (see below) that is part of it. Corpse trees are created when a vampire or wraith kills a dryad; the dryad's tree becomes the corpse tree and the dryad herself becomes a tree ghost. At the base of the tree is an opening leading to a strange chamber beneath, where the corpse tree’s victims are slowly digested. The "rising corpse" part of the tree animates to keep anyone but the tree ghost and her victims from entering the tree's chamber. A corpse tree can only harmed by magic and silver weapons. Magic fire will affect the tree but ice, electricity, and acid will have no effect, nor will normal fire. The tree ghost instantly knows of any harm coming to the corpse tree, and she can teleport to the tree to defend it against harm. If either the corpse tree or the tree ghost dies, the other will die as well. (Contributed by Sean “Stonegiant” Stone).
Tree Corpse HD5+2; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 fists (1d8); Move 0; Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: if both fists hit the victim is "bear" hugged for an additional 2d6 damage.

COUATL
Intelligent serpents with feathered wings, couatls can be fifteen feet long or more.  They can polymorph themselves, constrict victims for 1d6 hit points, and cast spells (3 level 1, 2 level 2, 1 level 3).  Generally tropical, some may be servitors of the gods.
Couatl: HD 8; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (2d6 + poison), 1 tail (1d6 constrict); Move 12 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Fly, poison, spells, polymorph.

COCKATRICE
A cockatrice resembles a bat-winged rooster with a long, serpentine tail.  Its bite turns enemies to stone unless a successful saving throw is made.
Cockatrice: HD 5; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d3 + petrifaction); Move 6 (Fly 18); Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: bite turns to stone.

CRAB, GIANT
Larger specimens of giant crabs might move more slowly – these stats are for a crab about 5ft in diameter.
Giant Crab: HD 3; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 pincers (1d6+2); Move 9; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

CRABMAN
Crabmen are bipedal creatures with a crab-like exoskeleton and a pincer at the end of each arm.  They are tribal creatures, found living near water (including subterranean lakes and rivers).
Crabmen: HD 2; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d4); Save 14; Move 9 (swim 9); CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

CRABNIPEDE
Crabnipedes are horrible sea creatures resembling man-sized centipedes with 4 pincers.  They hunt on sea floors and lake bottoms, and can crawl out from the water for hours, if the hunting seems better on land.  The crabnipede’s bite is mildly poisonous, causing paralysis for 1d6 turns (saving throw applies).
Crabnipede: HD 4; AC 4[15]; Atk 4 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d6 + paralysis); Move 6 (Swim 12); Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Paralysis poison (1d6 turns).

CROCODILE, NORMAL
Some normal crocodiles are man-eaters; all are dangerous and can conceal themselves well.
Crocodile: HD 3; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 9 (Swim 12); Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

CROCODILE, GIANT
The smallest of giant crocodiles are about 20ft long (normal crocodiles can grow to be as long as 15ft).
Crocodile, Giant : HD 6; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 bite (3d6), 1 tail (1d6); Move 9 (Swim 12); Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: None.

CRUMBLER
Crumblers are mountain and cavern-dwelling "rock men," who serve as guardians for important things. They are immune to fire, electricity and magical "blasting" attacks. Cutting weapons inflict half damage (and there is a 2 in 6 chance of non-magical weapons breaking against them). Hammers and maces do normal damage. They usually attack in groups, rising up out of the rubble surrounding boulder-laden areas. They cannot pursue, being rooted to the earth. (Contributed by Old Crawler).
Crumbler: HD 1; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 thrown rock (1d4) or fist (1d4); Move 0; Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Immunities.

CRYSTAL GROWTH
A strange fungus grown from mineral deposits, the Crystal Growth appears to be a large, multi-faceted, crystalline lump. It may be mistaken for a massive piece of quartz, as it is usually the size of a human head. Crystal growth feeds upon minerals found in the bloodstream of humans, warm-blooded humanoids, and other intelligent mammals. Despite lacking any discernible sense organs, the crystal growth can somehow sense life within 90ft, and anyone touching the crystal growth will suffer an immediate attack. The crystal growth moves by rolling on its facets, and can bounce off walls, rock faces, and other hard objects to leap a few feet into the air. When it comes into contact with bare flesh, it drains blood at the rate of 1d8 hit points per round. Due to its partly mineral structure, it is heavy and can knock creatures off their feet by rolling and leaping at them. Some crystal growths learn the tactic of dropping from above onto the head and shoulders of targets. As the target may be knocked senseless by this tactic, the crystal growth is usually able to get in a few rounds of blood drain before being interrupted by other crystal growths seeking a free meal. A battle over food between crystal growths is a strange sight, with combatants rolling and battering against each other.
Reptilian and avian creatures lack the minerals the crystal growths feed upon, and crystal growths ignore them. Canny reptilians, such as subterranean lizards and cave-dwelling lizard men, have learned to crack open a crystal growth and lick out its salty, milk-like juices. The juice of one crystal growth is sufficient nourishment for one man-sized creature for half a day, or a full day if it contains blood. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Crystal Growth: HD 5; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 blood drain (1d8); Move 9; Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Blood drain.

CRYSTALINE
The crystalines resemble humanoids whose entire bodies are composed of crystal. When a crystalline dies (reaches 0 hp), its body shatters in an explosion of crystal shards. All within 10ft failing their save suffer 2d6 points of damage (a successful save halves the damage).
Crystalines have learned to use their faceted crystal-like bodies in conjunction with light to temporarily blind their foes. On a failed save the victim is considered blinded and suffers a -4 penalty to hit for the next 1d4 rounds. This ability counts as an action as the crystaline must position it body to capture the light and direct it effectively against a foe. (Contributed by Skathros).
Crystaline: HD 3; AC 3[16]; Atk Weapon (1d6); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Blinding Refracted Light.

DARAKEL
The Darakel is a gigantic horse-headed eel, forty feet long and highly aggressive. It can attack with a nasty fanged bite and tail slap, and three times per day may exhale a 20-foot radius cloud of poison from its nostrils (5d6 points of damage in addition to normal attacks, saving throw for half damage). The Darakel can slither about on land at its normal movement rate, and enjoys preying upon farmers and livestock. It is immune to poison. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Darakel: HD 10; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (3d6), 1 tail (2d6); Move 12 (12 swim); Save 5; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Poison breath (3/day).

DARKMANTLE
Darkmantles are flying, octopus-like creatures with skin textured and colored to resemble limestone.  They ambush prey by sticking to cavern ceilings, and dropping to the attack (they are clumsy fliers).  If a darkmantle hits, it attempts to suffocate its prey by folding its tentacles (and the webbing between the tentacles) around the victim’s head.  If a darkmantle misses its attack, it will flap heavily into the air to make another attempt.  When a darkmantle hits, the victim makes a saving throw to avoid having his head enfolded in the darkmantle’s octopoid clutches.  If the saving throw succeeds, no damage is inflicted.  If the saving throw fails, the darkmantle has attached and inflicts 1d4 points of damage, continuing to constrict for an automatic 1d4 points each round thereafter.  Darkmantles have the ability to create darkness in a radius of 15ft.
Darkmantle: HD 1+2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 grab (1d4); Move 3 (Fly 3); Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Suffocation, darkness.

DEASIC (Ice Creeper)
The Deasic, or Ice Creeper, is a creature of living ice, resembling a long, branching, crystal-like structure. The deasic attacks by stealth, creeping up to living creatures in their sleep, smothering their air passages and draining their life heat. Anyone slain in this manner becomes frozen solid, as the warmth of life is sucked out of them. If discovered before it can complete its attack, the deasic will defend itself with dagger-like shafts of ice. It is immune to fire and cold based attacks, and can cause a burst of icy shards to erupt from its body, three times per day, causing 6d6 damage to all within 20ft. Deasic apparently have a rudimentary intelligence and society, as they have occasionally been observed gathering in large numbers to form gigantic snowflake-shaped structures under the aurora of polar skies in winter. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Deasic (Ice Creeper): HD 9; AC 3 [16]; Atk 1 smother (2d6) or 3 ice daggers (1d4); Move 6; Save 6; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Smothers, explosion of shards, immunities.

DEMON, ACHAIERAI
Achaierai resemble hellish birds standing fifteen feet tall on four stilt-like legs with cruel talons.  Three times per day an achaierai can breathe a black cloud of gas, inflicting 1d6 points of damage and requiring a saving throw to prevent being affected as if by a Confusion spell.  As demons, they are immune to fire.
Achaierai Demon: HD 6; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d6); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Magic resistance (25%), breath of confusion, immune to fire.

DEMON, BAALROCH (Sixth-category Demon)
The Baalroch’s name means, roughly, the Bull of Baal: the Baal-aurochs (the aurochs was a bull that stood twelve feet tall at the shoulder, and Baal is an ancient and evil pagan deity).  These powerful demons somewhat resemble vast minotaurs with great, spreading bat-wings; they burn with the fires of hell and are wreathed in flame.  Spells from casters below 6th level do not affect them, and against higher-level spell casters they are yet 75% immune to all spells.  In combat, a baalroch uses whip and sword; the whip can be used to reach great distances – on a successful hit the victim is pulled close to the baalroch and burned by the fires of the demon’s body (3d6 hit points).  Baalrochs are sometimes referred to in ancient texts as Balor or Baalor, which may be the name of a single demon rather than a term for all of them.  A baalroch could be forced or tricked into the service of a powerful wizard, but the risk would be immense.
Baalroch Demon: HD 9; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 sword (1d12+2) and 1 whip (entangles); Move 6 (15 fly); Save 6; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Magic Resistance (75%), surrounded by flame (3d6), magic weapon required to hit, unaffected by spells from casters lower than 6th level.

DEMON, DRETCH
These creatures are fat, with long, spindly arms and legs.  They have rudimentary human heads, with slobbering jaws and folds of fat.  Wretch demons have some weak demonic powers.  Although they are not particularly intelligent, they can cause a stinking cloud once per day, can teleport once per day, can cause darkness (10ft diameter) once per day, and can summon 1d4 giant rats once per day.
Dretch Demon: HD 4; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d6); Move 9; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Magical abilities.

DEMON, ERINYES
The erinyes, the “furies” of Ancient Greek mythology, are female demons who pursue those guilty of crimes against the order of the gods.  Their appearance is so terrible as to cause fear (saving throw).  They are impossible to hide from, being able to see invisible things and locate objects at will.  The furies carry a whip, which, if it hits, entangles the victim (saving throw) until the fury releases it.  The furies are immune to fire and cold, and have a magic resistance of 25%.  The blade of a fury’s sword causes paralysis (saving throw).
Erinyes Demon: HD 6; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 bronze sword (1d6 + paralysis); Move 12 (Fly 24); Save 11; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Magic resistance (25%), fear, immune to fire and cold, entangle.

DEMON, GLABREZU (Third-Category Demon)
The third-category demons, Glabrezu, are massive and horrible, standing ten feet high or more.  They have goat horns and humanoid shape, with no wings.  Four arms sprout from the torso: two huge arms with great crab-pincers, and two much shorter arms with claws.  Glabrezu can cause darkness in a 10ft radius, are immune to fire, can cause Fear at will, can levitate at will, can polymorph themselves, and are 60% resistant to magic.
Glabrezu Demon: HD 10; AC –3[22]; Atk 2 pincers (2d6), 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite 1d4+1; Move 9; Save 5; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Magic resistance (60%), demonic magical powers.

DEMON, GRIMLEK
Grimleks are large wolf-like demons covered in dark, ratty fur. Their most striking features are over-sized canines that prevent their mouths from closing and their lack of eyes. The absence of eyes does not negatively affect them. They are often used in the service of powerful demons and sorcerers as guards, trackers, or assassins.
A Grimlek may "latch on" to a victim after a successful attack, causing 1d6 points of damage every round until the victim is freed from the bite. Their bites can also cause a lycanthropic-like disease if the victim is not cured before the next new moon, at which point the infected person will become a hybrid similar to a werewolf. At this point even more powerful healing magics are needed to reverse the effects before the following new moon or the person will fully transform into a Grimlek and be lost forever. (Contributed by the Lizard of Oz).
Grimlek Demon: HD 5+3; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 24; Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Disease, continuous damage.

DEMON, HEZROU (Second-Category Demon)
Toad-like demons with bat wings, the Hezrou have magic resistance of 50%.  At will, they can cause fear (per the spell), detect invisibility (per the spell), and cause darkness 15ft radius.  They are immune to fire.
Hezrou Demon: HD 9; AC 0[19]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (2d8); Move 9 (Fly 14); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Magic resistance 50%, demonic magical powers.

DEMON, LEMURES
Lemures are vaguely humanoid, but their flesh is mud-like, shifting and soft upon their horrible bodies.  They are lower forms of demons, the fleshly manifestations of damned souls. These demons can only be permanently destroyed by sprinkling their disgusting bodies with holy water.
Lemure Demon: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 claw (1d3); Move 3; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Regenerate (1hp/round).

DEMON, MANES
The pathetic, damned souls of Roman mythology, manes are no larger than humans, with gray skin and empty eyes.  Non-magical weapons inflict only half normal damage on them.
Manes Demon: HD 1; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 claws (1d2), 1 bite (1d4); Move 5; Save 18; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Half damage from non-magic weapons.

DEMON, MARILITH (Fifth-Category Demon)
Mariliths have the six-armed torso of a cruel-eyed, beautiful woman, but the lower body of a huge constrictor snake.  They can wield weapons in all six arms at once, and the tail, if it hits, constricts for automatic damage after the initial hit.  Mariliths are among the most feared of demons (as much, even, as the mighty Baalrogs).  They can, at will, cast Charm Person, Levitate, and Polymorph Self, and are 80% resistant to magic.  Fire does not affect them.
Marilith Demon: HD 8; AC –3[22]; Atk 6 weapons (1d8), tail (1d8); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Magic resistance (80%), +1 or better magic weapon required to hit, demonic magical powers.

DEMON, NALFESHNEE (Fourth-Category Demon)
Nalfeshnee demons have the body of an enormous gorilla, the head of a boar, and cloven hooves.  These massive, brutish demons are actually quite intelligent, despite their appearance, an incongruity that has deceived and doomed many who would attempt to control or enslave them.  The very size of a nalfeshnee prevents them from being particularly agile flyers, though they do have wings.  Nalfeshnee are incredibly powerful (+2 to hit), and have various demonic powers in addition to being immune to fire: they cause fear as per the spell (at will), polymorph self (at will) and dispel magic (at will).  They can create a symbol of discord once per day.
Nalfeshnee Demon: HD 11; AC –1[20]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d6+2); Move 9 (Fly 14); Save 4; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: +1 or better magic weapon needed to hit, magic resistance (65%), +2 on to-hit rolls, immune to fire, magical abilities.

DEMON, QUASIT
Quasits are demon familiars, much like imps but without wings and with a less human-like shape.  A quasit can polymorph into two other forms (commonly a giant centipede and a bat).  These demons are 25% resistant to magic, regenerate at 1hp per round, can become invisible at will, and once per day can cast a Fear spell.  Their claws are laden with poison that reduces an opponent’s dexterity by 1 point (saving throw applies, lasts for 2d6 rounds).
Quasit: HD 3; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d2 + non-lethal poison), 1 bite (1d3); Move 14; Save 14; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Magic resistance (25%), non-lethal poison, regenerate (1hp/round), magical abilities.

DEMON, VROCK (First-Category Demon)
These demons are vulture-headed, with feathered but humanoid bodies, and huge dark-feathered wings.  All can create darkness in a radius of 5ft and are immune to fire.  They use their wings to allow both their arms and legs to be brought into combat, along with their beaked bite.  Vrock demons are quite stupid, though like most demons they consider themselves to be tremendously intelligent.
Vrock Demon: HD 8; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 beak (1d6), 2 foreclaws (1d4), 2 rear claws (1d6); Move 12 (Fly 18); Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Magic resistance (50%), darkness, immune to fire.

DEMON PRINCE, ORCUS
Orcus is a lord of the dead in Roman mythology.  As a demon-prince, Orcus controls the dead (specifically, the undead), and can also call upon his lesser demon-minions as well.  His staff causes death at its touch, and he uses magic-user spells at the following levels.  Level 1: 6; level 2: 5; level 3: 4; level 4: 3; level 5: 2; level 6: 1.  He has a magic resistance of 75%, and is completely immune to fire and charm spells.  At will he can animate dead, create darkness (15ft radius), cause fear, dispel magic, make a Suggestion per the spell, polymorph himself, or use ESP.  Such powers can be used at the same time as normal attacks.  His skull-tipped staff might have independent powers of its own, even possibly being an entity in its own right, merely cooperating with the demon prince and using him for its own purposes.
Orcus Demon Prince: HD 30 (125hp); AC –6[25]; Atk 1 staff (death – no save), tail (2d8), 1 claw (2d8); Move 9 (Fly 20); Save 3; CL/XP 35/6800; Special: Magic resistance (75%), +3 magic weapon required to hit, immune to fire and charm, death staff, spells, magical abilities, control undead, summon demon minions.

DERGENUE (Wall Wench)
When dungeons and dark temples have bas-reliefs of half-naked women carved into their walls, adventurers should be aware that some of these provocative decorations may be Dergenue, a race of intelligent, mischievous earth elementals. They hide in walls, using their innate ability to phase through earth and stone, and attack by reaching out to grab at unwary passersby (high chance to surprise). Their blows cause 1d6 damage, and they may drag their victims into the wall (to swiftly suffocate and die) if the attack roll succeeds by 4 or more points. Earth-based magic may cause 1d8 damage per spell level to a dergenue, or slay her outright, depending upon the spell. A dergenue takes normal damage from fire, cold, and weapons, but is otherwise immune to almost all other attack forms. If she steps out of a wall, a dergenue must remain in contact with earth or stone or lose 1 HP per turn, and they cannot cross a barrier of fire or water. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Dergenue: HD 2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 strike (1d6); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Drag into stone, immunities.

DERTESHA
The Dertesha are a race of aquatic humanoids dwelling in rivers and lakes. They appear tall, thin, and human-like, but with long tentacles in place of legs. Some are a mottled greenish-blue in colour, and others are reddish-brown; a few have been reported yellowish-white. Dertesha are able to travel above water – on land and through the air – by magical watery spheres, oily and roiling in appearance. The dertesha are slightly translucent, and their bones are sometimes visible.
Dertesha disdain physical conflict, being haughty and convinced of their moral and intellectual superiority over the land-dwelling races. They can cause large tentacles to erupt from any surface within 60ft, one per round, which restrain any target they strike (saving throw if hit negates). They may also cast Magic Missile at will. If pressed into close combat, their touch acts as a paralytic poison that can have hallucinatory after-effects. They may also simply drag air-breathing opponents under the water and hold them there to drown.
Dertesha have a sophisticated culture unseen by land-dwelling races, and they communicate frequently with creatures of elemental air and water. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Dertesha: HD 6; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 (0); Move 12 (swim or fly 12); Save 11; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: create tentacles, magic missile, paralysis touch.

DHEZIK
Dheziks look rather like dwarves with green skin and yellow eyes. However, they are feral, naked savages who paint swirls on their bodies with the blood of their foes. Their long white hair, eyebrows and moustaches are prehensile, enabling the Dhezik to entangle an opponent in close combat (saving throw to avoid), then bite the beard-entwined opponents with their prominent canine fangs. After a fresh kill there is a 1 in 6 chance their bloodlust may cause them to attack each other. Dheziks are completely resistant to arcane magic directed at them, due to strange glyphs branded on their shoulders. They are of low intelligence, are infertile, have a pack mentality, and will viciously attack Dwarves (+1 to hit). (Contributed by Sean Wills).
Dhezik: HD 4; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Entangle, Immune to Arcane Magic.

DINOSAURS
Dinosaurs are particularly useful in time-traveling adventures, for valleys that time forgot, or for the mounts of sword & sorcery barbarians.

DINOSAUR, ANKYLOSAURUS
An ankylosaurus looks like a turtle with spikes around the edge of its shell and elephant-like legs.  It has a tail with a clubbed end.  They are herbivores, and travel in small groups.
Dinosaur, Ankylosaurus: HD 8; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 clubbed tail (3d6); Move 9; Save 8; CL/XP 8/800; Special: None.

DINOSAUR, BRONTOSAURUS
Brontosaurus (Apatosaurus) is a massive, long-necked herbivore.  They are encountered in groups or even herds.  A brontosaurus stands 20ft tall at the shoulder, and weighs from 35 to 45 tons.
Dinosaur, Brontosaurus: HD 25; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 stomp (4d10); Move 9; Save 3; CL/XP 25/5900; Special: None.

DINOSAUR, ELASMOSAURUS
Fish-like, 15ft long carnivores, the elasmosaurus has a long neck like a sea serpent, but has a thick, saurian body with fins.  This is a good sea monster for use in campaigns where the dark horrors of the far-forgotten past might still survive.
Dinosaur, Elasmosaurus: HD 15; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (4d6); Move 1 (Swim 18); Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: Aquatic.

DINOSAUR, STEGOSAURUS
These dinosaurs have large back-plates standing out from the spine, and a spiked tail.  They are herbivores, and travel in small groups.
Dinosaur, Stegosaurus: HD 15; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 bite (1d8), 1 spiked tail (4d6); Move 9; Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: None.

DINOSAUR, TRICERATOPS
A triceratops has three horns protruding from its face, and a protective plate rising like an armored frill behind its head.  They are extremely hard to damage with frontal assaults.  The bony plate behind the head would also provide excellent protection for a rider.
Dinosaur, Triceratops: HD 15; AC 0[19] front, 5[14] back; Atk 1 gore (4d8); Move 12; Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: None.

DINOSAUR, TYRANNOSAURUS
Tyrannosaurus is a deadly carnivorous dinosaur, walking on two legs and attacking with a massively powerful bite.  When it bites prey, it grabs the victim in its jaws, shaking and chewing for automatic damage in subsequent rounds.  It can inflict such damage even against opponents as large as a brontosaurus.  Only creatures with shells, bone frills, or spines can avoid the horrendous tearing damage a tyrannosaur can inflict (e.g., triceratops, stegosaurus, ankylosaurus).
Dinosaur, Tyrannosaurus Rex: HD 18; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (4d8); Move 18; Save 3; CL/XP 19/2400; Special: Chews and tears.

DOG, GUARD or WAR
These are large, trained dogs.  Normal dogs would have hit dice 1 or lower, and inflict no more than 1d3 points of damage.
Dog, Guard: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 14; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

DJINNI
Djinn are one of the genies of folklore, creatures of the air (and possibly of the elemental planes).  They can carry 700 pounds of weight, and have a number of magical powers.  A djinni can create food and water of high quality, as well as wooden and cloth objects.  They can also create objects of metal (including coins), but all such magically created metals disappear in time.  Djinn can call up illusions, and although these are quite excellent they disappear when touched.  Djinni can turn themselves into gaseous form (cannot attack or be attacked, can enter any area that is not airtight), and can become invisible at will.  Finally, a djinni can turn itself into a whirlwind much like an air elemental, sweeping away any creature with one or fewer hit dice (the diameter of the whirlwind is 10ft.  More powerful types of djinn might be capable of granting limited wishes or even true wishes.
Djinni: HD 7+3; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 fist or weapon (1d10+1); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 9; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Magical powers, whirlwind.

DOLPHIN
Dolphins are unlikely to be opponents in most adventures, but they might be enchanted guardians, or “dark” dolphins of evil temperament.
Dolphin: HD 2; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 0 (Swim 24); Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

DOPPELGANGER
A doppelganger can change its form to resemble the physical appearance (including clothing and gear) of any person.  These creatures are immune to sleep and charm, and are considered magic resistant for purposes such as breaking through wizard locks and similar spells.  They have a very good saving throw (5) against magic of all kinds.
Doppelganger: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 claw (1d12); Move 9; Save 13 (5 vs magic); CL/XP 5/240; Special: Mimics shape, immune to sleep and charm.

DRAGOLEM
Dragolems are golems fashioned in the shape of dragons. These powerful constructs are usually used to guard valuable artifacts or vast treasures. A dragolem is unintelligent and is unaffected by charm spells, hold, sleep or other mind altering spells, as well a gases, cold, and fire. Dragolems are also immune to all spells of up to level 4, and to normal and silver weapons.  Dragolems are able to see the invisible and 3 times per day they may breath a poisonous cloud (20 X 20 X 20ft). The victim of the poisonous cloud must make a successful saving throw or die.  (Contributed by Skathros).
Dragolem: HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d10) or breath; Move 12 (fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Breath, Immunities.

##DRAGONS
##The size of a dragon is roughly 5ft of body length per age category, up to the adult size of 20ft.  Dragons have double normal treasure (i.e., with a gold piece value of four times the dragon's XP value).
##
##Do not roll hit points for dragons as normal.  Instead, determine the age category of the dragon, and that will tell you both the dragon’s hit points per die and how many points of damage per hit die the dragon’s breath inflicts:
##(1) Very young dragon: 1 hit point per hit die, 1 hit point per die inflicted by breath weapon.
##(2) Young: 2 hit points per hit die, 2 hit points per die inflicted by breath weapon.
##(3) Immature: 3 hit points per hit die, 3 hit points per die inflicted by breath weapon.
##(4) Adult: 4 hit points per hit die, 4 hit points per die inflicted by breath weapon.
##(5) Old: 5 hit points per hit die, 5 hit points per die inflicted by breath weapon.
##(6) Very Old (100 years old): 6 hit points per hit die, 6 hit points per die inflicted by breath weapon.
##(7) Aged (100-400 years old): 7 hit points per die, 7 hit points per die inflicted by breath weapon
##(8) Ancient (400+ years old): 8 hit points per die, 8 hit points per die inflicted by breath weapon
##
##Note that dragons, while they are dangerous opponents, are not by any means invincible.  In a medieval-type fantasy world, dragons are a common problem rather than a godlike creature of legend – so the statistics for dragons reflect a deadly but not mythical foe.  The GM is, of course, free to create stats for a more “mythical” conception of dragons. Since dice aren’t rolled for dragon hit points, it is possible for a truly mythical dragon to have more “numbers” per die than it’s actually possible to roll on a hit die.
##
##Breath Weapons: All dragons have a breath weapon of some kind, which can be used three times in a day.  The GM chooses when a dragon will use the breath weapon, or may roll a 60% chance in any given round.  Damage inflicted by a dragon’s breath weapon is indicated under the age category.  Breath weapons come in three different types: a cloud-shape for gaseous exhalations, a cone shape for fiery-type breath, and a line for spitting dragons.  The dimensions of a dragon’s breath differ according to the dragon’s type.
##
##If a dragon is beaten down by subdual damage (see rules for combat), the dragon will surrender and serve its masters, even to the point of allowing itself to be sold.  However, subdued dragons are only loyal while they are impressed by and frightened of their masters – signs of weakness may cause the dragon to escape or even attack its master.
##
##Standard-colored dragons generally have a challenge level of its (hit points/4) +2.
##
##DRAGON, BLACK
##Black dragons spit a deadly, corrosive acid rather than breathing fire.  The acid covers everything in a line 5ft wide and 60ft long.  Black dragons have a 45% chance of being able to talk; talking black dragons have a 5% chance of being able to cast 1d4 first level magic-user spells.  Black dragons range in size from 6 to 8 hit dice.
##Adult Black Dragon (6HD): HD 6 (24hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (3d6); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Spits acid.
##
##Adult Black Dragon (7HD): HD 7 (28hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (3d6); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 9; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Spits acid.
##
##Adult Black Dragon (8HD): HD 8 (32hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (3d6); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Spits acid.
##
##DRAGON, BLUE
##Blue dragons spit a blast of electric lightning in a line 5ft wide and 100ft long, affecting everything in its path.  A saving throw indicates half damage. Blue dragons have a 65% chance of being able to talk; talking blue dragons have a 15% chance of being able to cast 1d4 first level magic-user spells and 1d3 second level magic-user spells. Blue dragons range in size from 8 to 10 hit dice.
##Adult Blue Dragon (8HD): HD 8 (32hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: spits lightning.
##
##Adult Blue Dragon (9HD): HD 9 (36hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: spits lightning.
##
##Adult Blue Dragon (10HD): HD 10 (40hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: spits lightning.
##
##DRAGON, BRASS
##Brass dragons are greedy, but not as inimical to humankind as most of their kin.  A brass dragon can breath a cone-shaped blast of sleep gas (70ft long, to a width of 20ft at the end), or a cloud of fear gas 50ft in diameter (20ft from the ground to the top of the cloud).  A saving throw is required for anyone caught in a brass dragon’s breath weapon, regardless of level.  Sleep lasts until the victim is physically awakened; fear causes the victim to flee for 3d6 rounds.  Brass dragons have a 50% chance of being able to talk; talking brass dragons have a 5% chance of being able to cast 1d4 first level magic-user spells.  Brass dragons range in size from 6 to 8 hit dice.
##Adult Brass Dragon (6HD): HD 6 (24hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (3d6); Move 12 (Fly 24); Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Fear or sleep breath.
##
##Adult Brass Dragon (7HD): HD 7 (28hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (3d6); Move 12 (Fly 24); Save 9; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Fear or sleep breath.
##
##Adult Brass Dragon (8HD): HD 8 (32hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (3d6); Move 12 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Fear or sleep breath.
##
##DRAGON, BRONZE
##Bronze dragons are generally quite friendly to humankind.  They can spit lightning in a line 100ft long (5ft wide) or exhale a cloud of misdirection gas in a 30ft diameter (20ft from ground to top of cloud).  The misdirection gas forces anyone failing a saving throw to retreat away from the dragon for 6 full combat rounds.  The lightning bolt causes full damage (age category times dragon’s hit dice) on a failed saving throw, half damage with a successful saving throw.  Bronze dragons have a 70% chance of being able to talk; talking bronze dragons have a 15% chance of being able to cast 1d4 first level magic-user spells and 1d3 second level magic-user spells. These dragons range in size from 8 to 10 hit dice.
##Adult Bronze Dragon (8HD): HD 8 (32hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: spits lightning or misdirection gas.
##
##Adult Bronze Dragon (9HD): HD 9 (36hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: spits lightning or misdirection gas.
##
##Adult Bronze Dragon (10HD): HD 10 (40hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: spits lightning or misdirection gas.
##
##DRAGON, COPPER
##Copper dragons are generally hostile to evil/chaos, although they are not necessarily friendly to humans, either.  They are greedy and covet wealth.  A copper dragon can choose to spit a line of acid 5ft wide and 60ft long (saving throw for half damage), or to exhale a cloud of gas 30ft in diameter (20ft from top to bottom) that acts as a slow spell for a duration of 6 combat rounds (saving throw negates). Copper dragons have a 60% chance of being able to talk; talking copper dragons have a 10% chance of being able to cast 1d4 first level magic-user spells and 1d2 second level magic-user spells.  These dragons range in size from 7 to 9 hit dice.
##Adult Copper Dragon (7HD): HD 7 (28hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 9; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Spit acid or breathe slowing gas.
##
##Adult Copper Dragon (8HD): HD 8 (32hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Spit acid or breathe slowing gas.
##
##Adult Copper Dragon (9HD): HD 9 (36hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Spit acid or breathe slowing gas.
##
##DRAGON, GOLD
##Gold dragons are of Lawful alignment, can always speak, and cast spells as if they were a Magic-user of equal level to their age category (so that very old Gold Dragons are 6th level Magic-users). They can choose to either breathe fire in a cone 90ft long and roughly 30ft wide at the base, or breathe chlorine gas in a cloud 50ft long, 40ft wide, and 30ft high. These dragons range in size from 10 to 12 hit dice.
##Adult Gold Dragon (10HD): HD 10 (40hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d8); Move 12 (Fly 24); Save 5; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: fire or chlorine breath, magic-user spells.
##
##Adult Gold Dragon (11HD): HD 11 (44hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d8); Move 12 (Fly 24); Save 4; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: fire or chlorine breath, magic-user spells.
##
##Adult Gold Dragon (12HD): HD 12 (48hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d8); Move 12 (Fly 24); Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: fire or chlorine breath, magic-user spells.
##
##DRAGON, GREEN
##Green dragons breathe a cloud of poisonous gas, 50ft in diameter.  A successful saving throw indicates half damage.  Green dragons have a 55% chance of being able to talk; talking green dragons have a 10% chance of being able to cast 1d4 first level magic-user spells and 1d2 second level magic-user spells.  Green dragons range in size from 7 to 9 hit dice.
##Adult Green Dragon (7HD): HD 7 (28hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 9; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Breathes poison gas.
##
##Adult Green Dragon (8HD): HD 8 (32hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Breathes poison gas.
##
##Adult Green Dragon (9HD): HD 9 (36hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Breathes poison gas.
##
##DRAGON, RED
##Red dragons are the fire-breathing wyrms of legend.  They breathe fire in a cone-shape 90 feet long and roughly 30ft wide at the base.  Red dragons have a 75% chance of being able to talk; talking red dragons have a 20% chance of being able to cast 1d4 first level magic-user spells, 1d3 second level magic-user spells, and 1d2 third level magic-user spells.  Red dragons range in size from 9 to 11 hit dice.
##Adult Red Dragon (9HD): HD 9 (36hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (3d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Breathes fire.
##
##Adult Red Dragon (10HD): HD 10 (40hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (3d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Breathes fire.
##
##Adult Red Dragon (11HD): HD 11 (44hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (3d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 4; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Breathes fire.
##
##DRAGON, SILVER
##Silver dragons are active servants of law/good; although they do not necessarily pursue this goal by assisting humankind, most would protect human settlements and civilized regions in the face of serious threats.  They have the ability to polymorph themselves into human and animal forms.  Silver dragons can either breath a cone of cold (70ft long, to a width of 30ft) or exhale a cloud of paralytic gas 50ft in diameter and 20ft from ground to top (duration 3d6 turns, saving throw negates).  Silver dragons have an 80% chance of being able to talk; talking silver dragons have a 20% chance of being able to cast 1d4 first level magic-user spells, 1d3 second level magic-user spells, and 1d2 third level magic-user spells.  These dragons range in size from 9 to 11 hit dice.
##Adult Silver Dragon (9HD): HD 9 (36hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (3d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Breathes frost or paralyzing gas, polymorph.
##
##Adult Silver Dragon (10HD): HD 10 (40hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (3d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Breathes frost or paralyzing gas, polymorph.
##
##Adult Silver Dragon (11HD): HD 11 (44hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (3d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 4; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Breathes frost or paralyzing gas, polymorph.
##
##DRAGON, WHITE
##White dragons are usually found in cold regions, where they can camouflage themselves in ice and snow, lying in wait for prey.  They breathe a cone of intensely cold air and frost, with a length of 70ft and a base of 30ft.  White dragons are not able to talk or cast spells. White dragons range in size from 5 to 7 hit dice.
##Adult White Dragon (5HD): HD 5 (20hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (2d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Breathes frost.
##
##Adult White Dragon (6HD): HD 6 (24hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (2d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Breathes frost.
##
##Adult White Dragon (7HD): HD 7 (28hp); AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (2d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 9; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Breathes frost.

DRAGON TURTLE
The dragon turtle is not fast moving, especially on land.  However, it can breathe a cloud of scalding water and steam, inflicting damage equal to its own full hit points (save for half damage).
Dragon Turtle: HD 12; AC 0[19]; Atk 2 claws (2d6), 1 bite (4d6); Move 3 (Swim 12); Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Breath weapon (steam).

DRAGONNE
These creatures resemble a cross between a lion and a dragon, for they have a scaled dragon’s body (smaller than a dragon’s, though) with a great mane of flowing hair.  The head is leonine in shape, but has reptilian scales.  They do not normally have a breath weapon, but dragonnes have a tremendous roar.  Anyone hearing the roar must save or be weakened (-1 to all attacks) for 1 turn.
Dragonne: HD 9; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d6+1); Move 18 (Fly 9); Save 6; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Roar.

DRAUG (Wolf-Bear Folk)
The Draug are a race of 8ft tall, bear-like humanoids with wolf-like heads and tails. They are brave warriors and strong drinkers, and their shield-lined longhouses resound to boasting and merriment. The “wolf-bear folk” fight with spear, axe, dagger, or broad sword, and gain +2 to hit and damage due to their great strength. Any treasure will be in the form of hack-silver jewelry, weapons and shields of fine craftsmanship and exquisite decoration, and kegs of mead. Suggestions they were created by the same eccentric wizard responsible for the Owl Bear will be met with howls of laughter, and an overflowing tankard of mead. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Draug: HD 3+3; AC 7[12] or with shield 6[13]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8+2); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: +2 to hit.

DRIDER
Driders are spider-centaurs: the body is that of a massive spider, but the torso is that of a delicate human-like person.  Driders have the following natural abilities, usable once per day: dancing lights, darkness 15ft radius, detect magic, and levitate.  In addition, driders are spellcasters.  Male driders are magic-users (4/3/2/1), and females are clerics (2/2/2/1/1).
Drider: HD 7; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 18; Save 9; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Spells, magical abilities.

DRUID
Druids are priests of nature-oriented religions. They will go to great lengths to protect the flora and fauna under their care. Druids are a combination of magic-users and clerics. They are limited to wielding and wearing non-metallic weapons (staves, clubs, and such) and armor (leather). There is a 70% chance that they will be accompanied by 1d4+1 fighting-men of levels 2 to 5, along with 2d20 normal men.
Druids may take the shape of a mammal, reptile, or bird. The druid may shape change up to 3 times per day, but is limited to one type (bird, reptile, mammal) per day. The size of the animals the druid shape changes into ranges from as small as a raven to as large as a small bear.
Druids cast spells as magic-users of 5th to 7th level and clerics of 7th to 9th level. (Contributed by Skathros).
Druid (4HD): HD 4; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 (1d6 or weapon or spell); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Shape Change, spell-casting (MU5, CL7).
Druid (8HD): HD 8; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 (1d6 or weapon or spell); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Shape Change, spell-casting (MU6, CL8).
Druid (12HD): HD 12; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 (1d6 or weapon or spell); Move 12; Save 3; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: Shape Change, spell-casting (MU7, CL9).

DRYAD
Dryads are beautiful female tree spirits, and do not venture far from their home trees.  They can cast (as a native magical power) a strong charm that operates as a charm person spell with a –2 saving throw.  Those who are charmed seldom return, or might be kept for a hundred years and a day within the dryad’s tree.
Dryad: HD 2; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 wooden dagger (1d4); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Charm person (-2 save).

DWARF
Statistics above are for the common dwarf with no particular unusual characteristics.  A dwarf-at-arms would usually have a full 8 hit points, reflecting skill and general toughness.  Stronger dwarves (sergeants-at-arms, for example) might have more hit dice or unusual bonuses to hit, even magical abilities if dwarves are magical in your fantasy universe (Norse myths are a good example of this).  Do not bother to treat more powerful NPC dwarves as fighting-men or character types; just assign the right number of hit dice and abilities (if any) and keep moving along with the fantasy.
Dwarf: HD 1; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 6; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Detect attributes of stonework.

DWELVER
Dwelvers were once a race of dwarves that followed their greed to the elemental plane of earth to mine it for its riches. Throughout the millennia they slowly began to change into the very substances they sought. While still resembling dwarves in form, they are made of stone, ores and gems. Dwelvers are malevolent and greedy and will defend their claims against all comers. They now exist only to mine worlds of their mineral resources, which they use to create more of their race. Groups of Dwelvers are able to summon Earth Elementals, which will serve them faithfully. At least eight Dwelvers are needed to summon an 8 hit dice Earth Elemental, twelve for one of 12 hit dice and sixteen to summon one of 16 hit dice. It is also likely Dwelvers are able to employ other earthen magics.  (Contributed by The Lizard of Oz).
Dwelver: HD 4 +2 ; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 weapon or strike (1d8); Move 6 ; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Group magic.

EAGLE, GIANT
Giant eagles are just large enough to carry a human rider.  Some varieties of the breed may be intelligent, and truly unusual specimens might even be capable of casting spells or using other magical powers.  Because giant eagles can be tamed as mounts, their eggs and fledglings are worth considerable amounts of gold (500+gp).
Eagle, Giant: HD 4; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 talons (1d4), 1 bite (1d8); Move 3 (Fly 24); Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

EEL, GIANT
These statistics are for giant eels about ten feet in length.  Larger eels would have correspondingly greater hit dice.  The electric shock generated by a giant electric eel would cause 3d6 points of damage in the surrounding water, with no saving throw.  See also, “Lampreys,” which are also eels.
Eel, Electric Giant: HD 2; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 bite (1d3); Move 0 (Swim 9); Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Electric shock.
Eel, Moray Giant: HD 4; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 0 (Swim 9); Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

EFREETI
Efreet are a type of genie associated with fire (unlike the djinn, who have powers over the air).  Efreet can carry up to a thousand pounds of weight, and under the right circumstances they can be forced to serve as slaves (until they figure out how to free themselves without exactly disobeying a command).  An efreeti can cast Wall of Fire (per the spell).  They appear as giant humans with cruel features, their red skin flickering with flames.
Efreeti: HD 10; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 fist or sword (1d8+5); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Wall of fire.

##ELEMENTALS
##Elementals are living manifestations of the basic forms of matter: earth, air, fire, and water.  They are usually summoned from their native planes of existence to do the bidding of a powerful wizard.  These beings can also be “chained” within objects or structures to give the objects magical properties.  Elementals are barely intelligent at all, but they are as powerful as the forces of nature that they actually are.
##
##ELEMENTAL, AIR
##Air elementals can turn into a whirlwind of air with a diameter of 30ft, hurling any creature of 1 HD or less for great distances (and almost certainly killing them).  Elemental whirlwinds are approximately 100ft high.
##Air Elemental (8HD): HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (2d8); Move (Fly 36); Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Whirlwind.
##Air Elemental (12HD): HD 12; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (2d8); Move (Fly 36); Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Whirlwind.
##Air Elemental (16HD): HD 16; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (3d8); Move (Fly 36); Save 3; CL/XP 17/3400; Special: Whirlwind.
##
##ELEMENTAL, EARTH
##Earth elementals are hulking man-shapes of rock and earth.  They batter opponents with their great fists, although damage is reduced by 1d6 if the opponent is not standing upon earth or rock.  Earth elementals can tear apart stone structures, being able to rip down even a castle wall in a matter of 1d4+4 rounds (minutes).
##Earth Elemental (8HD): HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (3d6); Move 6; Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Tear down stonework.
##Earth Elemental (12HD): HD 12; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (3d6); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Tear down stonework.
##Earth Elemental (16HD): HD 16; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (4d6); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 17/3400; Special: Tear down stonework.
##
##ELEMENTAL, FIRE
##Fire elementals are formless masses of flame, perhaps with a vaguely human shape.  Their attacks cause flammable materials (including wood) to ignite if the material fails a saving throw (determined by the GM).
##Fire Elemental (8HD): HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (2d6); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Ignite materials.
##Fire Elemental (12HD): HD 12; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (2d6); Move 12; Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Ignite materials.
##Fire Elemental (16HD): HD 16; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (3d6); Move 12; Save 3; CL/XP 17/3400; Special: Ignite materials.
##
##ELEMENTAL, WATER
##Water elementals cannot move more than 60ft from a large body of water, and their damage is reduced by 1d6 if the opponent is not standing in water (or swimming, etc).  These powerful beings can overturn small boats, and can overturn a ship if given 1d4+4 rounds to work at it.  On water, they can attack ships, battering them to pieces within 1 hour if not prevented or distracted.
##Water Elemental (8HD): HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (3d6); Move 6 (Swim 18); Save 8; CL/XP 8/800; Special: overturn boats.
##Water Elemental (12HD): HD 12; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (3d6); Move 6 (Swim 18); Save 3; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: overturn boats.
##Water Elemental (16HD): HD 16; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (4d6); Move 6 (Swim 18); Save 3; CL/XP 16/3100; Special: overturn boats.

ELEPHANT
Trained elephants can carry a howdah upon their backs, with up to six people within.  In battle, wounded elephants may become maddened and go on a rampage, ignoring all training.
Elephant: HD 10; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 trunk (1d10), 2 gore (1d10), 2 trample (2d6); Move 12; Save 5; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: None.

ELF
Elves are generally inhabitants of the deep woods or wild places.  It can be very dangerous to intrude into their domains.  The statistics below are for a “standard” elf, although many elves will have magical abilities or more hit dice than 1+1.
Elf: HD 1+1; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 sword (1d8) or 2 arrows (1d6); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

ETHEREAL SHADE
An ethereal shade resembles a mass of black, wispy smoke, which billows and contracts as it floats about. Ethereal Shades are undead and are thus affected by a cleric's Turn Undead ability (treat as a Type 9 undead). At night, or in darkness, it becomes nearly invisible. The referee may require a check or saving throw to spot an ethereal shade in such conditions. Battling an ethereal shade in dimly illuminated environments incurs a -4 penalty to hit. The ethereal shade inflicts damage by use of its icy touch. Ethereal Shades are immune to damage from non-magical weapons.
By wrapping itself around a victim’s head, the ethereal shade may momentarily distract and befuddle its foe. The effects are similar to a Confusion spell and last as long as the ethereal shade remains wrapped around the victim's head. Any damage inflicted upon the creature while it is wrapped around a foe will result in the ethereal shade taking half the damage, and its engulfed victim taking the other half. (Contributed by Skathros).
Ethereal Shade: HD 8; AC 1[18]; Atk Icy touch (2d6) or special ability; Move 9; Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Hard to see, immune to non-magic weapons, befuddlement.

ETTERCAP
Ettercaps are a strange race of spindly, long-armed bipeds about seven feet tall.  They have spider-like spinnerets, and are often found in the company of giant spiders.  Ettercaps are flesh-eating predators who use their spinnerets to create traps of various kinds such as web-filled pits or deadfall traps with silken ropes.
Ettercap: HD 5; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d8 + poison); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Poison bite, traps.

ETTIN
Ettins are two-headed giants, twelve to fifteen feet tall.  They are difficult to catch by surprise, and make excellent guardians.
Ettin: HD 10; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 clubs (3d6); Move 12; Save 5; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: None.

## EXOSKELETON, GIANT (ANT)
## Giant ant exoskeletons can be animated into undead creatures by unusual and rare necromantic magic.  They are not poisonous.  These dry husks are turned as skeletons.
## Exoskeleton, Giant Ant: HD 1; AC 3[16]; Atk Bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Immune to sleep, hold, and charm spells, half damage from piercing and slashing weapons.

EXOSKELETON, GIANT (BEETLE)
Giant beetle exoskeletons are animated by necromantic magic quite different from that used in the Animate Dead spell.  Bladed and piercing weapons cannot damage these dry, massive husks.  They can be turned as ghasts, but are usually protected from turning by potent glyphs carved into their chitin exteriors.  The insides of a giant beetle exoskeleton are quite hollow, and more than one necromancer has carpeted and cushioned the interior of a giant beetle exoskeleton for use as a slow-moving vehicle.
Exoskeleton, Giant Beetle: HD 5; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 6; Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Immune to turning, unaffected by sleep, hold, and charm, immune to non-blunt weapons.

EXOSKELETON, GIANT (CRAB)
Giant crab exoskeletons are animated by specific necromantic spells, cast upon the very largest giant crab exoskeletons (10ft in diameter).  Bladed and piercing weapons cannot damage these animated empty shells.  They can be turned as mummies, but are usually protected from turning by potent glyphs carved into the shell, as are most giant exoskeletons.  The insides are hollow, and up to four people can travel inside.
Exoskeleton, Giant Crab: HD 6; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 pincers (2d6); Move 6; Save 12; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Immune to turning, unaffected by sleep, hold, and charm, immune to non-blunt weapons.

EXPLODING BONES
Nearly identical to skeletons in appearance, Exploding Bones differ in coloring from their more mundane counterparts. Exploding Bones are a bright pulsating red, their coloring becoming brighter and pulsating faster as they near death and the inevitable explosion which gives them their name.
When these crimson skeletons reach 0 hp their bodies explode sending a shower of jagged bones, which hit all within 20ft. All within this radius suffer 1d6 points of damage from the explosive shower of bony shrapnel. A successful Saving Throw halves this damage. Exploding bones are treated as Type 2 undead for turning purposes. (Contributed by Skathros).
Exploding Bones: HD 2; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Explode when killed.

EYELESS FILCHER
An eyeless filcher is the undead body of a criminal maimed or tortured to death in brutal punishment for its crimes; usually these criminals were guilty of particularly heinous crimes during life. These creatures are animated by an extremely powerful undead force, which causes fear and horror in any onlooker: at the sight of an eyeless filcher, anyone failing a saving throw will either flee in terror for 1d12 rounds or be paralyzed until the undead is out of sight (equal chance). The eyeless filcher shares the same resistances and weaknesses of other powerful undead; it is immune to cold-based and mind-affecting spells, magical weapons are required to hit it, it can be turned by a cleric (as a wraith), and suffers harm from holy water (2d8). As there is precious little flesh left on its bones, the eyeless filcher suffers half damage from edged and pointed weapons. It may be distracted by the sight of symbols of law and justice, such as the insignia of the city watch or the holy symbol of a deity of law, and will break off attacking to focus its rage on this image. An eyeless filcher retains any criminal knowledge and thieving skills it had in life, and will use these to its advantage. In combat, if both of its claw attacks hit, it latches on with inhuman strength, strangling for automatic damage (2d6 total) per round thereafter; its deadly grip can only be broken by distracting symbols as above, the death of its victim, or a sincere apology from anyone involved in its own capture, trial, and punishment. If the eyeless filcher manages to kill an officer of the law, whether guard or magistrate or scribe of the court, the unfortunate victim rises from the dead the next day as a double-strength zombie under its control. The eyeless filcher attacks and steals, deliberately causing as much chaos and fear as it can. If a law officer renounces his profession in the creature’s presence it will sink to the ground, destroyed, with a mocking laugh. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Eyeless Filcher: HD 9; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 claws (1d8); Move 12; Save 6; CL/XP 12/1700; Special: Immune to non-magic weapons, strangle, half damage from non-blunt weapons.

FALSHANTOG-YOTH (Fal-yoth, the "Hungering Vines")
The Hungering Vines lives in darkness, with a ravenous hunger that can only be satiated by blood and flesh. This creature resembles a writhing mass of vines coming together at a trunk, supported by 4 huge roots. Many eye-stalks jut from the trunk, peering about for food; Fal-yoth is almost never surprised. The vines pull fresh carrion under its roots, where there is a huge mouth that consumes the plant's victims. Fal-yoth can move surprisingly fast in a shambling gait, once it pulls its roots from the ground or rock into which it has settled. It takes 1 round for its vines to push it from the earth and allow it to move. Fal-yoth attacks any and all creatures that stray within reach of its vines (10ft) for 1d8 damage, or will twist its vines into a sort of "tail," which can batter a single target for a colossal 4d10 points of damage. Any target hit by the "tail" will be knocked down and backward 1d4x10ft.
If a weapon successfully hits Fal-yoth, the creature's corrosive sap spatters the weapon and destroys it. Magical weapons are permitted a saving throw. Fal-yoth can also generate a sphere of darkness within 30' that lasts 1d4 rounds, every 10 minutes. Fal-yoth is partially immune to lightning attacks, taking half normal damage from such attacks. A saving throw is required each combat round to resist the horror of the hunger radiating from Fal-yoth. If a character fails his save, he is paralyzed by horror and unable to act that round.  It may be that more than one of these creatures exist, but only one is known. (Contributed by Chgowiz).
Falshantog-yoth - The Hungering Vines: HD 8; AC 9[10], Atk all within 10ft (1d8) or 1 "tail" (4d10); Move 13 (0 when planted); Save 8, CL/XP 12/2000, Special: Destroys weapons successfully hitting it, generates darkness, partially immune to lightning, causes fear.

FELIKAUR
Felikaur were magically bred from tigers in ancient times, as a battle-beast of the feuding noble houses. Some escaped into the wild and flourished. The felikaur looks like a massive tiger, but with overlapping horn plates instead of fur. They have large bat-like wings sprouting from the shoulders, and a spiky tail. These creatures are intelligent enough to prepare ambushes and use their surroundings to tactical advantage; in the wild, they leap from cover to cover while attacking. In a gladiatorial arena, they are able to take advantage of pit traps, spikes, barriers, or other such tactical obstacles.
A felikaur's tail spikes deal little damage, but secrete a paralysing toxin. They can also pick up a human or smaller foe, carry it into the air for a few rounds, and drop it from a height of 20 to 60 feet. Lastly, the felikaur can spit a glob of corrosive acid to a distance of 20 feet, for 1d6 to 3d6 damage (in any given day, the available stomach acid permits a total of 9 dice of potential damage). This acid will eat through and ruin clothing, non-magical armor, backpack straps, etc, in 1 round. The means by which the ancients controlled and tamed these beasts is unknown - they cannot be trained.  (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr"). 
Felikaur: HD 6; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 claws (1d6) and 1 bite (2d6); Move 15 (Fly 18); Save 11; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Spit acid, drop opponents, surprise.

FEREC (Foxtaur)
Orange-furred and bushy-tailed with large ears and multiple limbs, the Ferec is a mutated fox. It has a long body, with four pairs of legs, and a centaur-like humanoid torso with two pairs of arms. Despite its creative intelligence and expansive vocabulary, the ferec is excitable, superstitious, and easily distracted. It excels in various forms of craftsmanship, and enjoys puzzling out the workings of traps, puzzle boxes, unusual weapons, or other such contraptions. The heightened senses of a ferec, including superior night vision and heightened hearing, ensure it will never be surprised. They are sensitive to sunlight, and prefer a nocturnal lifestyle. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Ferec: HD 6+3; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 weapons (1d6) and 1 bite (1d4); Move 18; Save 11; CL/XP 6/400XP; Special: Cannot be surprised.

FLYING JELLYFISH, GIANT
As its name suggests, the Giant Flying Jellyfish is a marine life form that has adapted to existence in the skies. It is a hazard to sky-travelers and flying creatures, as it is almost translucent and is also known to hide in clouds. The giant flying jellyfish is partially gaseous in nature, and flies by means of jetting air. The giant flying jellyfish attacks by trailing its tentacles onto the decks of ships, into the space occupied by flying opponents, or through settlements when it hunts across the ground. It can make up to 2 attacks per 10ft cubic space occupied by opponents, to a maximum of 8 attacks. Each tentacle causes 2d6 damage, and may cause paralysis lasting 1d4 days (saving throw negates). It has also evolved a distinctive defence against magic. Any spell or similar attack against it builds up a charge in the creature, if it makes its saving throw. This charge is equal to 1 point per spell level, to a maximum equal to the jellyfish's hit dice. In any round, in addition to making tentacle attacks, the giant flying jellyfish can discharge from 1 to 4 energy charges with the following effects: (1) All spell-casting beings within 50ft suffer intense mental distress for 1d3 rounds per charge, making it impossible to cast spells during this time. (2) All creatures and vessels flying via magic within 30ft have their movement rate halved for a period of 2 rounds per charge. (3) All creatures within 10ft of the giant flying jellyfish suffer -1 to all die rolls per charge expended for 1d2 turns. If severely threatened, the giant flying jellyfish may expend a blast of 8 charges, with effects as if 4 charges had been expended, but doubling the effective ranges of the blast's effects. This massive expenditure of power also allows the jellyfish to quadruple its flying movement rate for 4 rounds in order to escape. Most specimens are 20-40ft in diameter, with 40-80ft long tentacles. Larger versions, of 24 or even 32 HD, may also exist, particularly in the ethereal realities or in the voids between the moons. Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts ("Myrystyr").
Flying Jellyfish, Giant: HD 16; AC 8[11]; Atk up to 8 tentacles (2d6+paralysis); Move 0 (fly 9); Save 3; CL/XP 19/4100; Special: Discharge spell energy, paralysis.

FLYING SQUIRREL, CARNIVOROUS
These squirrels, larger than normal flying squirrels, are carnivorous.  They may attack humans if provoked, enchanted, or in sufficient numbers to feel confident of success.
Flying Squirrel, Carnivorous: HD 1d4hp; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d2); Move 6 (Glide 12); Save 18; CL/XP B/10; Special: Glide silently.

FORMIAN
Formians are highly intelligent ant-people, walking on their four hind legs but using their specialized fore-claws to hold objects.  Their ant-like heads have deadly mandibles, which they use in combat.  Formians have a caste society, like ants.  The workers are small (about 75 pounds) and fairly stupid.  Warriors are as large as a human being, and no more intelligent than the workers.  A noble class, the taskmasters, rules formian society and are normally only found in the cities of this strange and alien race.  These formians are as large as a horse, and extremely intelligent.
Formian cities are small, containing no more than 500 workers, 50 warriors, and 10 taskmasters, plus a royal retinue.  The royal retinue includes a queen, males equal to half the number of taskmasters, and an additional 1d6 taskmasters, 3d6 warriors, and 6d6 workers.  Formians also keep humans and members of other races as slaves or trade-goods.
Formian, Worker: HD 1; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 15; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.
Formian, Warrior: HD 3; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 bite (1d6), 2 mandibles (1d4), 1 sting (1 + non-lethal poison); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Non-lethal poison sting (2d4 damage, save for half).
Formian, Taskmaster: HD 7; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+1), 1 sting (1d2 + non-lethal poison); Move 12; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Non-lethal poison (4d4 damage, save for half).
Formian, Male: HD 8; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+1), 1 sting (1d2 + non-lethal poison); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Non-lethal poison (4d4 damage, save for half).
Formian, Queen: HD 10, AC 3[16]; Atk none; Move 6; Save 5; CL/XP 0/0.

FOX MONK
The Fox Monk is a short fox-like humanoid, garbed in a shabby, quilted robe and bearing only a begging bowl and walking stick. Fox monks have taken vows of poverty and transience; they rely upon charity for food and somewhere to sleep, never staying in one area for more than a few days. They may defend themselves with a bite (1d4 damage), or in unarmed combat. A fox monk's strike causes the target’s nervous system to spasm, causing him to drop any items held and move at half normal speed for 1d4 rounds (saving throw negates). Fox monks may also forego all attacks to perform dodging leaps, causing enemies to attack at -3 to hit. Lastly, a fox monk can cast Protection from Evil and Purify Food and Drink once per day. Despite their vows, these pious beggars are considered troublemakers by most civilized folk. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Fox Monk: HD 2+3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d4) or 1 strike (1d3 + spasms); Move 15; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Spells, monkish strike.

FROG, GIANT
Giant frogs range in size from two or three feet long (a “small” giant frog), up to massive specimens of eight feet long (a “large” giant frog).  In between are the “medium” giant frogs, five to six feet long.  Large giant frogs can swallow opponents whole on a natural attack roll of 20.  All giant frogs can make a 100ft leap that reaches a height of 20ft.  Small giant frogs increase this length to 150ft.  If an opponent is swallowed whole, he dies in three rounds.  To escape, the victim cannot attack normally, and must have a bladed weapon to even attempt cutting his way out of the frog.  An attack roll of 18 or better, including any modifiers, indicates that the victim cuts his way out of the frog, slaying the beast in the process.  Attacks on the giant frog have a chance to damage a swallowed creature.  Giant frogs can use their tongues to grab prey and haul them to the frog’s mouth; anyone grabbed in this way takes no damage until the frog begins bites it in the following round, hitting automatically and inflicting maximum damage on that one attack.
Frog, Giant (1HD): HD 1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d3); Move 3 (or 150ft leap); Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Leap.
Frog, Giant (2HD): HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 3 (or 100ft leap); Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Leap.
Frog, Giant (3HD): HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d8); Move 3 (or 100ft leap); Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Leap, swallow whole.

FROG, GIANT, KILLER
About three feet long, giant killer frogs are the product of mad breeding experiments.  They have claws and teeth, and attack relentlessly.
Frog, Giant Killer: HD 1+4; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 claws (1d2), 1 bite (1d4+1); Move 3 (or 150ft leap); Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Leap.

FROGLUM
In ages past, some mad experimenter created a golem from frog-flesh: the ancestor of all froglums. Some frog genes, however, can switch genders and even produce hermaphrodites. The ancestor of froglums was likely the first (and probably the only) self-breeding golem. Froglums are huge bipeds virtually identical to their shared ancestor: eight feet tall with slimy green skin, webbed feet, and great frog-like eyes. Their legs resemble those of frogs, but are much shorter and allow the froglum to stand upright. These creatures are soulless, having been bred from an unnatural and artificial origin. They have no detectable thoughts. In general, they serve any chaotic master, especially one who resembles a frog or a powerful wizard. They are seldom found acting on their own volition, for it is in their nature to follow a powerful master. A froglum's slimy skin makes it resistant to fire (half damage). (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Froglum: HD 8; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 fists (2d6); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 8/800; Special: half damage from any fire.

FUNGAL CREEPERS
The Fungal Creeper is a patch of fungus growing upon a boulder or wall, which often appears weathered and strangely corroded. The name comes from its ability to creep along the wall, moving about to follow living creatures. Fungal creepers draw sustenance from minerals found in rock and stone, but supplement their diets with fresh blood. The fungal creeper can sense the warmth of life within 60ft, and reacts by moving closer. It attacks by sinking tiny root-like appendages into exposed flesh, latching on to cause continuous damage if the attack roll is a 19 or 20. It may be distracted by fresh meat, whether in the form of rations no more than 1 day old or the body of an unconscious combatant. They are scavengers, and will move to feed off carrion as soon as it is detected. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Fungal Creeper: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 (1d6); Move 3; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Attaches on 19 or 20.

FUNGI, VIOLET
Violet fungi are large mushrooms with tentacle-like growths at the base.  The tentacles are not long, averaging about 2-3ft.  A hit from a tentacle causes flesh to rot (saving throw applies) unless a cure disease spell is cast upon the afflicted area.
Fungi, Violet: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 4 tendrils (rot); Move 1; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Tendrils cause rot.

FURIOUS FOUNTAIN
A furious fountain resembles a large anthropomorphic stone fountain, usually spraying a jet of water from its mouth. These creatures are similar to golems, but the animating spirit within is an imprisoned water elemental.
When standing still, a furious fountain is indistinguishable from any ordinary fountain. A furious fountain may attack with its stony fist, or with a jet of water. The animate fountain can spew out a violent stream of water at a range of 200ft, three times per day. The target suffers 3d10 points of damage, and is pushed back the full remaining distance of the jet's range (a successful save halves both the damage and the distance pushed back). A second saving throw allows the victim to remain standing and avoid dropping any items held in hand. Like golems, furious fountains are unaffected by non-magical weapons. These magical creatures can only be affected by spells that specifically target water or stone, with appropriate results to be determined by the referee. As a guideline, the fountain will lose, at most, 4d10 hit points from such spells; Part Water would be an example of a spell that might inflict such damage.  (Contributed by Skathros).
Furious Fountain: HD 60hp (15HD); AC 5[14]; Atk 1 (fist 3d8 or water jet); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 18/3800; Special: Immune to non-magical weapons, immune to most magic, water jet.

GARGOYLE
Gargoyles are winged beings resembling the carven monstrosities that bedeck the walls of cathedrals and many subterranean dungeons.  They are vicious predators.
Gargoyle: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d4), 1 horn (1d6); Move 9 (Fly 15); Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Fly.

GARGOYLE, MAGGOG
Maggogs are bat-winged gargoyles. They can utilize magic as a 5th level magic-user (4/2/1). Typically they are found deep in the bowels of the earth. Maggogs are related to demons, but aren't guardians of the underworld. Their terrible claws can inflict damage, along with a barbed tail, which is used as a stinger. (Contributed by Old Crawler).
Gargoyle, Maggog: HD 5+1; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d6) and 1 sting (1d8); Move 12 (Fly 18); Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Spell use.

GELATINOUS CUBE
Gelatinous cubes are semi-transparent cubes that slosh through subterranean passages, engulfing debris and carrion to digest.  Their entire substance is acidic: if the cube hits successfully, the victim must make a saving throw or become paralyzed (6 turns) for the cube to devour.  Most gelatinous cubes contain various metallic treasures or gems that they have engulfed but not yet digested.
Gelatinous Cube: HD 4; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 (2d4); Move 6; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Paralysis, immune to lightning and cold.

GHAST
Ghasts are highly intelligent ghouls.  Their charnel stench is so powerful that anyone nearby (about 10ft) must make a saving throw or suffer a –2 penalty on attack rolls.  As with ghouls, a hit from a ghast causes paralysis if the victim fails a saving throw.
Ghast: HD 4; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d6); Move 14; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Stench, paralyzing touch.

GHOUL
Ghouls are pack-hunting undead, corpse eaters.  They are immune, like most undead, to charms and sleep spells.  The most dangerous feature of these horrid, cunning creatures is their paralyzing touch: any hit from a ghoul requires a saving throw or the victim becomes paralyzed for 3d6 turns.
Ghoul: HD 2; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d4); Move 9; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Immunities, paralyzing touch.

GHOUL, AO-NYOBO (BLUE WIFE)
This female ghoul-creature can be found lurking in the ruins of old castles.  They resemble old, courtly ladies with blue skin, blackened teeth, and no eyebrows. As with ghouls and ghasts, a hit from the Ao-nyobo causes paralysis if the victim fails a saving throw. The Ao-nyobo is capable of flight and prefers to ambush victims from above - often hiding in the rafters of half-ruined buildings to swoop down upon the unsuspecting. In the outdoors, an Ao-nyobo will often chase down any escaped prey in a relentless, airborne hunt. Ao-nyobo are turned as ghasts.
Ghoul, Ao-nyobo: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d6); Move 14 (fly 9); Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Paralyzing touch.

GIANTS
Giants are a staple of fantasy gaming, huge and dangerous creatures that often have a taste for human flesh.  Most are not particularly intelligent.

GIANT, CLOUD
Cloud giants are cunning beasts, often living in cloud-castles in the sky (hence their name).  They throw rocks for 6d6 hit points of damage.  Cloud giants are famous for their ability to smell out food, enemies, and Englishmen.
Giant, Cloud: HD 12+3; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 weapon (6d6); Move 15; Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Hurl boulders.

GIANT, FIRE
Fire giants are usually found near volcanic mountains, in great castles of basalt or even iron. They throw boulders for 5d6 hit points of damage.
Giant, Fire: HD 11+3; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 weapon (5d6); Move 12; Save 4; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Hurl boulders, immune to fire.

GIANT, FROST
Frost giants dwell in cold regions, where they build (or conquer) castles in remote places of ice and snow.  They throw boulders or great chunks of ice for 4d6 points of damage.
Giant, Frost: HD 10+3; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 weapon (4d6); Move 12; Save 5; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Hurl boulders, immune to cold.

GIANT, HILL
Hill giants are the least of the giant races; most are brutish cave-dwellers who dress in pelts and uncured hides.  They throw rocks for 2d8 points of damage.
Giant, Hill: HD 8+2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 weapon (2d8); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Throw boulders.

GIANT, STONE
Stone giants dwell in caves, isolated in the mountain fastnesses.  They throw rocks for 3d6 points of damage, and can be quite crafty in setting up ambushes in their native mountains.  Travelers who wander into the territory of stone giants seldom return.
Giant, Stone: HD 9+3; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 club (3d6); Move 12; Save 6; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Throw boulders.

GIANT, STORM
Storm giants are the largest of giants, the most intelligent, the most magical, and the most likely to talk with humans rather than simply devour them.  Storm giants can live in underwater sea-castles as well as on the heights of mountains.  They throw boulders for 7d6 points of damage, and have the power to control weather (as per the spell).
Giant, Storm: HD 15+5; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 weapon (6d6); Move 15; Save 3; CL/XP 16/3200; Special: Throw boulders, control weather.

GIBBERING MOUTHER
Gibbering mothers are amorphous blobs of flesh with multiple eyes and mouths appearing and disappearing from the quivering mass of the body as it moves along.  The mouths gibber and babble meaningless, speech-like noises; the monster is perpetually accompanied by this disturbing and inhuman sound except when it is waiting to ambush prey, in which case the eyes and mouths are all kept closed, and the monster appears to be nothing more than an oozy pile of earth.  When the mouther spots prey, it begins gibbering loudly, causing anyone within 60ft to make a saving throw or become confused (per the spell).  Each round spent listening to the mouther requires another saving throw.  In any given round, the mouther will have six mouths available either to spit or to bite.  The creature’s spittle flashes brightly upon impact with most surfaces, causing anyone nearby to make a saving throw or be blinded for one round.  The mouther’s bites are not particularly deadly in and of themselves, but once a mouth hits it fastens on and continues to do automatic damage thereafter.  Also, if a character has 3 or more mouths fastened to him, there is a risk of slipping and being covered by the mouther (which allows the mouther to attack with 12 additional mouths on its underside).  The chance of slipping is 5%, and if more than 3 mouths are attached the chance increases by 5% per additional mouth.  The ground around a gibbering mouther, in a radius of 5ft, will be soft and mud-like, for the mouther changes the consistency of the ground beneath itself.
Gibbering Mouther: HD 4+4; AC 1[18]; Atk 6 mouths (1hp); Move 3; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Gibbering, spit, pull prey underneath.

GILLMONKEY
Gillmonkeys are nasty, monkey-like creatures that live in the sea.  They have hairless, pinkish-brown skin and short tentacle-like growths on the top of the head.  They attack in packs, sometimes swarming over a ship’s rail.
Gillmonkey: HD 1d6hp; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d4), 2 claws (1hp); Move 6 (Swim 12); Save 18; CL/XP B/10; Special: Swim.

GLASS BUTTERFLY
Glass Butterflies are tiny, wizard-made entities, made of colored glass and resembling butterflies the size of a bird or cat. They were once made as decoration for the noble houses of antiquity, and are usually found in large numbers flitting aimlessly about. Glass Butterflies will usually ignore any creature that comes near them, and simply fly a few feet away if attacked. They are constantly in motion, creating a pleasant play of light and color if there is a light source present, and only touch the ground when destroyed. Being mindless, they are unaffected by spells such as sleep, charm, and hold. They are otherwise extremely susceptible to damage, and can be easily destroyed. However, the magic that animates a Glass Butterfly is too powerful to be contained in such a frail and simple vessel. When slain, there is a burst of energy in a 2ft radius. This does not cause damage, but has a cumulative chance of causing a random spell effect, equal to 5% per Glass Butterfly destroyed in the past turn. Whenever the percentage reaches 100%, it resets to 0%. If caught in an area effect, 1 Glass Butterfly is destroyed per dice of damage, and one damage die is rolled to determine how many additional Glass Butterflies are destroyed. Any Light spell cast upon a Glass Butterfly is increased by 50% in both duration and area of effect.
Glass Butterfly: HD 1d4hp; AC 9[10]; Atk none; Move 12 (Fly 20); Save 18; CL/XP A/5; Special: chance of random spell discharge upon death

GLITTERSKULL
The Glitterskull is a gold-plated skull, with large red gems set into the eye sockets. It flies by magical levitation, and is surrounded by a reddish halo. This halo is of magical flame, and causes a roaring sound when the creature is flying about. It also sheds light in a 15ft radius, and at a distance may be mistaken for torchlight. The skull is that of a wizard, usually but not always human. A glitterskull has the spellcasting ability of a level 8 magic-user, and does not require a spellbook to regain its daily spells. Being a former wizard, the glitterskull prefers to attack by casting spells, but it may also fly at opponents, ramming into them for 1d6 damage. Its fiery halo does not cause extra damage, but may ignite flammable objects. Glitterskulls can only be harmed by magical weapons. They can catch a Magic Missile spell within their eyes, and hurl it back at the caster the following round (instead of attacking) or use the spell energy to heal themselves (spell damage adding to HP). Glitterskulls are also immune to poison and gas attacks, and take only half damage from fire-based attacks.
The glitterskull is capable of speech, and retains much of the intelligence of its former life. While it may parley with strong parties, the mind trapped inside a glitterskull has been warped by the millennia, and most utter little more than mocking laughter and scornful commentary.  The gems and gold plating of a glitterskull may be worth anywhere from 200 to 1,200 GP, in addition to other treasure.  (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Glitterskull: HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 ram (1d6); Move 0 (Fly 18); Save 8; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Spells (as level 8 magic-user), immune to non-magical weapons, immune to poison and gases, half damage from fire.

GLURM (Zen Frog)
Intelligent frog-like humanoids, Glurm can usually be found sitting in meditation or study amid scenes of natural beauty. They wear simple loincloths and will have a bamboo staff within arm’s reach. Their dwellings are of woven reeds, and contain only a few simple items. If there are several glurm in the area, there will be a “place of harmony” near a stream or river. This will be a cleared expanse of sand, dotted with boulders to sit upon; the glurm come here to discuss philosophy and practice their martial arts.
The spiritual studies of the glurm have given them mystical powers, and they practice martial arts, accounting for their armor class. Glurm are pacifists, and if threatened will attempt to drive off foes with an intimidating display of martial arts. All onlookers within 30ft must make a saving throw or back away for 1 round. If forced into combat, a glurm's unarmed strikes cause 1d4 damage; opponents of equal or smaller size can only act after the glurm in the following round if the glurm inflicts maximum damage. Armed with a bamboo staff, a glurm can focus its spiritual energy for a +2 bonus to damage; in addition, if the attack roll is 4 or more higher than required to hit, the glurm may disarm a foe, trip them up, or perform a similar manuever. In an open area, the glurm may also use its staff to make a pole-vault kick against an opponent up to 10ft away, possibly knocking them down. Lastly, the glurm has the abilities of a level 3 cleric.
Any treasure possessed by the glurm will generally be in the form of scrolls discoursing on obscure philosophical topics, and finely crafted writing materials. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr"). Compare similar monster: Todawan Master.
Glurm (Zen frog): HD 3+2; AC 4 [15]; Atk 1 unarmed strike (1d4) or 1 bamboo staff (1d6+2); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Martial arts, spells as level 3 cleric (2 level 1 spells).

GNOLL
Gnolls are tall humanoids with hyena-like heads.  They may be found both aboveground and in subterranean caverns.  They form into loosely organized clans, often ranging far from home to steal and kill with rapacious ferocity.
Gnoll: HD 2; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (2d4) or weapon (1d10); Move 9; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

GOAT, GIANT
Giant goats include giant mountain goats.  These creatures are as large as a pony, and can be ridden.
Giant Goat: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 gore (2d6); Move 18; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: +4 damage on charge.

GOBLIN
Goblins are small creatures (4ft tall or so) that inhabit dark woods, underground caverns, and (possibly) the otherworldly realms of the fey.  They attack at –1 in the full sunlight.
Goblin: HD 1d6hp; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 9; Save 18; CL/XP B/10; Special: -1 to hit in sunlight.

GOBLIN, BELFRY
Belfry goblins appear to be related to the other goblinoid species, but they have wing membranes which run from their arms down their sides, quite similar to flying squirrels. These membranes grant the belfry goblin the ability to glide, and in no way inhibit the ability of their hands to manipulate objects.  Hanging upside down on the ceiling in dark corners, belfry goblins are all but invisible, waiting for their prey to pass by and then attacking with a deadly swooping attack, a javelin in each hand, doing double damage on a successful hit with the swooping attack. If the swoop attack succeeds on a "to hit" roll of 18 or better, the belfry goblin does additional damage as it passes by, raking with its foot claws for an additional 1d6 damage.  A belfry goblin has 2 attacks per round, with any combination of its hand held weapon, claws, or bite. The bite of a belfry goblin is dangerous in much the same way as a rat bite, with a 5% chance per bite the victim will contract a disease. Diseased victims will sicken and die within 1d6 days, unless the victim rolls a saving throw.
For every 20 belfry goblins encountered there will be a leader with the maximum of 9 hit points and who attacks as a 2 HD creature. If a nest of 40 or more individuals is found, there will be a chieftain with 2+2 HD who attacks as a 3 HD monster. The chieftain will have an honor guard of 4 particularly fearsome warriors whose stats are equal to that of the leader type. There is also at least a 15% chance that in any belfry goblin encounter there will be a vampiric variant present. The chance to encounter these special vampiric belfry goblins increases to 30% for standard lairs and 60% for nests of 40 or more.  (Contributed by DuBeers and the Lizard of Oz).
Goblin, Belfry: HD 1; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 attacks from claws (1d6), weapons (1d6), and/or 1 bite (1d4); Move 6 (Fly 12); Save 17; CL/XP 3/60; Special: glide, swooping attack, chance of disease.

GOBLIN, BELFRY, VAMPIRIC
Belfry goblins appear to be related to the other goblinoid species, but they have wing membranes which run from their arms down their sides, quite similar to flying squirrels. These membranes grant the belfry goblin the ability to glide, and in no way inhibit the ability of their hands to manipulate objects.  Hanging upside down on the ceiling in dark corners, belfry goblins are all but invisible, waiting for their prey to pass by and then attacking with a deadly swooping attack, a javelin in each hand, doing double damage on a successful hit with the swooping attack. If the swoop attack succeeds on a "to hit" roll of 18 or better, the belfry goblin does additional damage as it passes by, raking with its foot claws for an additional 1d6 damage.  A belfry goblin has 2 attacks per round, with any combination of its hand held weapon, claws, or bite. The bite of a belfry goblin is dangerous in much the same way as a rat bite, with a 5% chance per bite the victim will contract a disease. Diseased victims will sicken and die within 1d6 days, unless the victim rolls a saving throw.
These creatures are physically weaker and lighter in coloration than the standard belfry goblin, having only 1-1 HD, but they are able to gain strength from drinking the blood of their victims. On a successful bite attack, the vampiric belfry goblin sucks blood from its victim for 1d4 points of damage, wrapping its arms and legs around the victim and holding them fast. Each subsequent round, the victim must break the grip or the vampiric belfry goblin automatically drains an additional 1d4 hit points of blood drain; the chance to break the grip is 30%. Vampiric belfry goblins gain temporary bonus hit points from blood they drink, gaining 1 hp for every 1 hit point drained from a victim, up to double its normal number of hit points. Once the vampiric belfry goblin exceeds its normal hit points, it gains +1 to hit and damage.  (Contributed by DuBeers and the Lizard of Oz).
Goblin, Belfry Vampiric: HD 1-1; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 attacks from claws (1d6), weapons (1d6), and/or 1 bite (1d4); Move 6 (Fly 12); Save 18; CL/XP 4/120; Special: glide, swooping attack, chance of disease, blood drain.

GOBLIN, ONI-AKA
The Oni-aka (Asian Red Goblin) are short, scaly humanoids with small horns on their slightly pointed heads. They have coarse black hair, and coal black eyes. These evil beings are known to raid villages to steal slaves and cattle. They are typically armed with clubs and short spears they use for throwing. These goblins are said to have been born of fire in the pits of the earth; and as such they are almost impervious to fire damage, suffering only half normal damage from any fire-based attack.  Note that these goblins are from Asian mythology, and might not be related to normal goblins in anything but name. (Contributed by MikeD).
Goblin, Oni-aka: HD 1; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 9; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Fire resistant.

GOBLIN, ONI-KAGE
The Oni-kage (Asian Shadow Goblin) are short, black-skinned humanoids with large, pale eyes, dwellers of dark caves and deep bamboo thickets. All oni-kage detest bright lights, and they suffer -1 penalties to combat in daylight. They have keen night vision, and their somewhat supernatural nature makes them completely invisible in darkness (visible only by use of spells).  Note that these goblins are from Asian mythology, and might not be related to normal goblins in anything but name. (Contributed by MikeD).
Goblin, Oni-kage: HD 1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 9; Save 18; CL/XP 2/30; Special: -1 penalty in daylight, Invisible in darkness.

GOBLIN, ONI-YAMA
The oni-yama (Asian Mountain Goblin) are hairless, grey-skinned humanoids with short tusks protruding from their mouths. They are smaller than ogres, but much larger and bulkier than men -- though their distinctively hunched posture makes them appear somewhat smaller than they really are. These big goblins dwell in remote mountain caves and forgotten ruins, often preying upon merchants and travelers passing through their territories. In general, they arm themselves with such weapons as they can take from their victims, for they are not industrious. They wear an assortment of armor, usually misused but still functional. The oni-yama bully, and often enslave, lesser goblins. Despite their size, the oni-yama are extremely stealthy on their great, flat feet, and gain surprise on a roll of 1-3 on a d6. Note that these goblins are from Asian mythology, and might not be related to normal goblins in anything but name. (Contributed by MikeD).
Goblin, Oni-yama: HD 2; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: 50% chance to gain surprise attacks.

GOBLIN, REDCAP
Redcaps are goblins driven mad by the insidious effects of raw Chaos, reducing them to a bestial state. Utterly devoid of empathy with any living creature, including ordinary goblins, redcaps delight in inflicting pain. Indeed, redcaps derive a strange form of sustenance from doing so. Any successful attack a redcap achieves heals it for an amount equal to the amount of damage it deals to its target. Worse yet, a redcap can double its total hit points in this manner. Thus, a undamaged redcap with 5 hit points who manages to deal 3 points of damage on its attack will now have 8 hit points and, assuming it continues to remain undamaged, can be "healed" for another 2 hit points before reaching its maximum potential hit points.  Though thoroughly insane, redcaps work well with others of their kind, forming predatory packs that attack any creature they can find. Redcaps often take gruesome souvenirs of their victims, such as fingers, ears, and eyeballs, which they use to adorn themselves. Many also use the blood of their prey to dye their tattered clothing, including their hats, the practice of which gave these foul aberrations their common name. (Contributed by James Malizsewski).
Goblin, Redcap: HD 1d6hp; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 9; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Vicious healing, -1 to hit in sunlight.

GOLEMS Golems are man-shaped creatures built to serve their masters, usually
powerful wizards or high priests.  They are often used as guardians.  Golems
cannot be hit with non-magical weapons, and are immune to the sorts of spells
used to create them (iron golems being immune to fire, for instance).  You can
find the details in the specific monster descriptions.

GOLEM, CLAY
The “original” golem of folklore, clay golems may be created by clerics or powerful priests.  They are massive clay statues of human beings, imbued with a rudimentary intelligence and the ability to move and follow their masters’ commands.  For each round of combat, a clay golem has a 1% chance (cumulative) to go berserk, leaving its master’s control and attacking enemies and allies alike.  Clay golems are not damaged by slashing or piercing weapons.  They are immune to all spells other than those affecting earth, and these have very diminished effects – with one exception.  An earthquake spell may be used to utterly destroy a clay golem.
Golem, Clay: HD 12 (50hp); AC 7[12]; Atk 1 fist (3d10); Move 8; Save 5; CL/XP 14/2700; Special: Immune to slashing and piercing weapons, Immune to most spells.

GOLEM, FLESH
Flesh golems are man-like creations stitched together from human limbs and other parts, like a Frankenstein monster.  Damage inflicted by lightning heals the golem (per the movie), and it is slowed by fire and cold spells.  No other type of spell than lightning, fire, or cold affects a flesh golem.  Only +1 or better magic weapons can harm a flesh golem.
Golem, Flesh: HD 10 (45hp); AC 9[10]; Atk 2 fists (2d8); Move 8; Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Healed by lightning, hit only by magic weapons, slowed by fire and cold, immune to most spells.

GOLEM, IRON
Iron golems are huge moving statues of iron.  They can breathe a 10ft radius cloud of poison gas as well as attacking with great power.  Weapons of +2 or less do not affect them.  These hulking statues are slowed by lightning spells, but fire-based spells actually restore hit points to them.  No other type of spell affects them.
Golem, Iron: HD 20 (80hp); AC 3[16]; Atk 1 weapon or fist (4d10); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 18/3800; Special: Poison gas, immune to all weapons +2 or less, slowed by lightning, healed by fire, immune to most magic.

GOLEM, STONE
Stone golems are massive stone statues animated by very powerful magics (much more than just animate object, in other words).  They are slowed by fire spells, and damaged/healed by rock to mud spells and the reverse.  Spells that affect rock (and fire spells) are the only magic that affects them.  They can only be hit by +2 or better weapons.
Golem, Stone: HD 15 (60hp); AC 5[14]; Atk 1 fist (3d8); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 16/3200; Special: +1 or better magic weapon to hit, immune to most magic.

GOLEM, WAX
Wax Golems are among the simplest type of golem to create. Their bodies are carved out of tallow or wax and imbued with the same basic level of intelligence as the more powerful Clay Golem. Unlike their stronger kin, Wax Golems have no chance of going berserk, nor are they automatically immune to spells. They do possess magic resistance of 25% and cannot be hit by non-magic weapons. Because of the pliable nature of their bodies, Wax Golems easily absorb the force delivered by blunt weapons and only take half damage from those sources. Slashing and piercing weapons inflict normal damage to Wax Golems. Fire and heat that damage the golem will inflict twice normal damage. (Contributed by Andrew Trent).
Golem, Wax: HD 4 (20 HP); AC 5[14]; Atk 2 fists (1d8+3); Move 6; Save 13; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Resistant to blunt weapons, Magic resistance (25%).

GORGON
Gorgons are bull-like creatures with dragon-like scales.  Their breath turns people to stone (60ft range, saving throw applies).
Gorgon: HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 gore (2d6); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Breath turns to stone.

GRAVEBIRD
Gravebirds are highly intelligent undead birds (usually ravens or crows) that have been brought back to life through foul magic. Any creature wounded by a Gravebird must make a successful saving throw or contract Grave Fever, a disease similar to Mummy Rot, which prevents magical healing and causes wounds to heal at one-tenth of the normal rate. A cure disease spell will remove the fever. Gravebirds can Speak with the Dead (as per the spell) three times daily. (Contributed by Andrew Trent).
Gravebird: HD 2; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d4) or 2 claws (1d3); Move 4 (Fly 16); Save 16; CL/XP 3/120; Special: Disease upon successful hit (save applies), Speak with the Dead.

GREAT LANTERN WORM
Great Lantern Worms are huge megadriles that grow 100ft or more in length, exceeding ten feet in width. They are subterranean, chewing tunnels in rock before swelling to fit the tunnel. Almost their entire length is taken up by the empty stomach, with their organs on the exterior, covered by a tough membrane of earthen hue. At the rear of the worm's long gut is a photophore, a light-emitting organ used as a lure for prey. Once the prey has travelled halfway down the stomach, the worm's mouth will close and acid will be sprayed from various points along the gut wall, requiring a saving throw each round to dodge. Should the entrapped prey try to cut their way out, any weapon that succeeds in hitting the stomach wall has a chance of dissolving.  The chance for a non-magic weapon to dissolve is 1 in 8, and for a magic weapon the chance is 1 in 12.  Each time a weapon avoids being dissolved, +1 is added to the chance of dissolving upon the next hit. For example, if a magic weapon hits and is not dissolved, the chance of dissolving on the second hit is 2 in 12 rather than 1 in 12. If a victim manages to stay alive long enough to return to the mouth, he can attempt to force it open (1 in 6 chance to succeed, +1 per helper). Victims are digested within hours. (Contributed by Sean Wills).
Great Lantern Worm: HD 30; AC 7[12]; Atk Acid spray (3d4) Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 30/8400 ; Special: acid spray, swallow whole.

GREEN SLIME
Green slime isn’t technically a monster, just an extremely dangerous hazard in underground tombs and other such places.  Any metal or organic substance it touches begins to turn to green slime (saving throw).  It can be killed with fire or extreme cold, and the transformation process can be arrested by the use of a cure disease spell.

GREY OOZE
Grey ooze is almost identical to wet rock, but is a slimy, formless substance that devours prey and carrion with its acidic secretions, lashing forward to strike enemies.  Grey ooze is immune to spells, heat, and cold damage. Metal (but not stone or wood) must make a saving throw against acid (12 or better on d20) when exposed to grey ooze (even if the contact is as brief as the strike of a sword) or be rotted through.  When the grey ooze hits a character in metal armor, the armor must also make a saving throw.  Only cutting and piercing damages a grey ooze – it is impervious to blunt or crushing attacks.
Ooze, Grey: HD 3; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 strike (2d6); Move 1; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Acid, immune to spells, heat, cold, and blunt weapons.

GRICK
Gricks resemble massive, human-sized worms with 4 tentacles surrounding a beaked mouth.  They rear up to attack, focusing on one opponent at a time.  They do not immediately try to feed on dying prey, but if given the chance they will drag unconscious or dead bodies into their lairs to feed.  Blunt weapons do not harm them, due to their thick hides and resilient flesh.
Grick: HD 2; AC 4[15]; Atk 4 tentacles (1d3), 1 beak (1d2); Move 6; Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Immune to blunt weapons.

GRIFFON
Griffons have the body of a lion, with the wings, head, and fore-talons of an eagle.  These creatures can be tamed and ridden as mounts.  They usually nest in high mountain aeries, where they lay their eggs and hunt their prey.   Because the fledglings can be tamed, young griffons and griffon eggs command a very high price in the marketplaces of the great cities, or to barons and wizards.
Griffon: HD 7; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (2d8); Move 12 (Fly 27); Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Flight.

GRUE (1)
A grue is a nasty, large thing with dark grey or green skin, rather like a half-filled water balloon ten feet long, with a huge mouth. Inside its leathery skin, the grue is mostly gelatinous. Grues cannot coexist with light; if they are exposed to a light source, they instantly recede with the darkness. In the dark, however, they are dangerous. If a grue hits with a natural roll of 20 on its attack die, it swallows the victim whole; which will satisfy the grue, and it will leave if it is permitted to do so (the swallowed victim will suffocate in 2d4 rounds and then be digested). They are non-intelligent, and are immune to blunt and piercing weapons (e,g., clubs, maces, arrows, spears). Swords, axes, and other cutting weapons inflict normal damage. Grues can magically extinguish one normal light source per round at a distance of 100ft. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Grue: HD 9; AC 2[17]; Atk bite (2d6); Move 9; Save 6; CL/XP 10/1100; Special: immune to blunt and piercing weapons, extinguish normal lights, swallow whole.

GRUE (2)
Found in the darkest recesses of dungeons or in the deepest corners of attics, grues are the essence of Chaos and Darkness given form by evil and a ravenous appetite for living souls. Grues have no specific shape or form, save for the ravening, slavering jaws that close around the unsuspecting, or those who would venture into the darkness without a torch or match in their inventory. Grues are chaotic spirits that exist in a 10ft x 10ft area of pure darkness. Any light source brought into that same area forces the grue to flee to the nearest dark area. Any creature within the area of darkness is subject to attack by the grue's jaws. For all intents and purposes, grues are invisible to anyone within the area of darkness, but outside of the area, a grue looks like "living darkness."  Grues are only affected by magical weapons or weapons that emit light of some kind, including a torch (which would act like a club). They are resistant to all spell attacks, save those that have some sort of light component (a light spell, prismatic spray or even fireball). Grues can magically extinguish one normal light source per round at a distance of 100ft.  A grue's attack will replenish its hit points with any hit points "eaten" from its victims. A grue cannot replenish beyond its starting hit points. Anyone killed by a grue will vanish, including all of his equipment. In 1d4 days, he will become a grue. (Contributed by Chgowiz)
Grue, Chaos: HD 6; AC 2[17]; Atk bite (2d6); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: immune to all but light/magic weapons and spells with light component/effect, can extinguish lights w/in 100ft, restores own HP with damage caused to victims.

GUMP
Gumps are large and blubbery humanoids with an overly broad jagged toothed grin and a pair of small, deep-set eyes in an otherwise featureless face. Gumps are motivated by hunger and the deep down joy they feel when murdering a helpless foe. Anyone meeting the gaze of a gump must save vs. paralysis at +2 or be held in place for 2-5 rounds (fighting without looking incurs a -4 penalty to-hit). It is safe to view a gump's reflection in a mirror or other reflective surface. The gump is able to squint in an odd manner which keeps it from holding an ally.  (Contributed by JD Jarvis).
Gump: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6+2); Move 9; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Gaze attack paralyzes (+2 save).

GWURRUM
Mist of faerie vengeance
An eerie green mist seeps through the trees at twilight, stealing up to the houses of those who have failed to leave an offering to the faerie folk of the woods. It is the gwurrum, monstrous servant of the faerie court, come to pay a visit.
The gwurrum is composed of equal parts choking mist and thirst for blood. It can force its way through the tiniest cracks in any barrier, crawl uphill, and pour down chimneys and throats like cold water. The misty body is roughly 10ft in diameter, and its trailing tendrils can reach up to 10ft from its form. Any and all targets within range will be attacked, though if free to choose, the faerie monster will focus upon children and small animals: those whose loss will cause the greatest sorrow and misery in the punished community. Dim-witted and malicious, it can be distracted by offerings of whiskey, recitations of poetry extolling the virtues of the faerie-folk, and the singing of an unbroken voice. Iron objects cause an additional 1d6 points of damage to the gwurrum (the mere touch of iron causes 1d6 points), but these items will turn to dust within 1 round after contact with the gwurrum. The faerie monster is otherwise immune to fire, electrical, poison, or mind-affecting attacks. Any creature with magical singing abilities, such as a harpy or bard, can keep a gwurrum at bay for 1 round per hit dice or level. A gwurrum is affected by Protection from Evil, and cannot attack anyone who is thoroughly drunk.
In the morning, when a gwurrum departs, dead leaves will be found scattered around the dwelling of anyone it attacked. Children who survive the attack of a gwurrum may, upon growing up, pass freely into the faerie realms. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Gwurrum: HD 9; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 per target in 10ft reach (1d8/round); Move 6; Save 6; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: immunities.

HAG, ANNIS
Annis are giantesses, horrid looking females as large as ogres.  They lust for human flesh to eat, and often polymorph themselves into human form to hunt (an old lady being a common shape), or to lure their prey from places of safety.  Strong as a bear, the annis can attack in similar fashion; if she hits with both claws, the victim is held and the annis inflicts automatic damage with all three attacks thereafter.  The victim isn’t helpless, but cannot break free unless he is as strong as a giant.  Annis are somewhat magical; they can summon mists to hide themselves and their rank lairs; some are also witches with the ability to cast spells (such being left to the GM’s determination, if witch-hags are to be encountered).
Hag, Annis: HD 8; AC 1[18]; Atk 2 claws (2d8), 1 bite (1d8); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Hug and rend, polymorph, call mists.

HAG, MOUNTAIN (YAMA-UBA)
The mountain hags ("Yama-uba" in Asian-type settings) are solitary, horrid looking blue-skinned females as large as ogres. They live in mountainous regions and near passes where they can hunt for food. Mountain hags feast on all manner of flesh; but they prefer humans, attacking with their long claws and wicked mouths that stretch from ear to ear. (Contributed by Mike Davison).
Hag, Mountain: HD 7; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (1d8); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: None.

HAG, SEA
The sea hag is a giantess much like the annis, but living in the seas, or in fetid, salt-water marshes.  These hags are so hideous that the sight of their faces causes weakness from fright and horror; if the victim fails a saving throw, his strength ability score is reduced by one-half for 1d6 full turns.  The hag can also cast an evil eye upon those she chooses to slay; but only three times per day.  The range of this deadly gaze is 30ft, and the hag’s eye need not be met in order for death to occur (saving throw).  Like the annis, sea hags feast with gusto upon human flesh.
Hag, Sea: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 6 (Swim 18); Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Death gaze, weakness gaze.

HARPY
Harpies have the upper body of a human female and the lower body and wings of a vulture.  Their song is a charm that draws its victims to the harpy (saving throw applies), and the harpy’s touch casts the equivalent of a charm person spell (again, saving throw applies).
Harpy: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 talons (1d3) and weapon (1d6); Move 6 (Fly 18); Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Flight, siren-song.

HAWKTOAD
Hawktoads are levitating amphibians with the body of a very large toad but with long, clawed front legs and no back legs at all. The hind end of a hawktoad is a foot-long tail, like that of a tadpole; the full length of a hawktoad is three feet.  These bizarre creatures move by lashing through the air with their tadpole-like tails, and attack by swooping in at opponents, scratching with their tiny claws and lashing out with their long tongues. A hawktoad's tongue does no damage, but if the attack succeeds the tongue has whipped around the character's neck.  If this happens, the hawktoad lands at the back of the victim's neck; it holds tight with its tiny claws and begins to strangle the opponent, using its muscular tongue as a garrotte. When a hawktoad is attached in this way, the strangling character will find it difficult to reach around and attack, of course.
Each round thereafter, the character must successfully roll a d20 under his constitution score or fall unconscious; each round a cumulative +1 is added to the d20 roll, making it harder and harder to avoid passing out. Once the character passes out, the toad strangles him to death in three rounds. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Hawktoad: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 claws (1d2), tongue (strangles); Move 3 (Fly 12); Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Strangling tongue.

HEAD-STEALER
A head-stealer is the headless, undead body of someone who has been decapitated, usually by execution or dungeon trap. The body is animated with a vengeful spirit, and seeks to re-enter society by removing someone else’s head and placing it atop its own neck. Although the head-stealer's body remains in a relatively preserved state, its stolen heads continue to decay, and the head-stealer seeks to replace them on a regular basis. Although the head-stealer can animate its substitute heads, the unnatural grafting of dead flesh to undead flesh is highly imperfect. The head does not attach by magic, so a the head-stealer is required to use a measure such as rope or nails to affix the new head. Moreover, the head stealer can only imprecisely animate a stolen head, and while it can cause speech to issue forth, the slurring and twitching will tend to raise suspicion. As with all undead creatures, the head stealer is immune to mind-affecting spells and vulnerable to holy water. The head stealer can be immediately destroyed by attaching the head it formerly possessed in life, if the head still exists. Any attack against the head stealer may dislodge the stolen head on a natural roll of 19 or 20, causing the head-stealer to attack at -1 until it can reattach the head or a replacement. If deprived of a head, it may try to rip one from the torso of an attacker. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Head-stealer: HD 3+4; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6) or strike (1d4); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

HEADLESS HOUND
A headless hound appears to be a large black dog, but with an eerie green glow where the head should be. The creature’s flanks may be lined with scars or torn open, exposing faintly glowing bones and the absence of innards. The headless hound attacks with a ghostly bite that passes straight through clothing and armor to the flesh. The defender's armor class is modified only by any Dexterity bonus. Bitten flesh heals at half normal rate unless magic is used. If five or more headless hounds are present, their howling requires a saving throw to avoid fleeing in fear (only required once). The headless hound takes half damage from normal weapons. Despite their spectral nature, headless hounds are not undead. However, they are immune to sleep, charm, and hold spells. They are more properly faerie-kin, and according to folklore will cease their haunting and join the wild hunt if it passes nearby. Anyone slain by a headless hound has a chance of returning from the grave as a shadow-like spirit, to be pursued nightly by the headless hound pack. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Headless Hound: HD 6; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 18 (Fly 6); Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Bite passes through armor (only dex bonus modifies AC), half normal healing rate from wounds, pack-howl causes fear.

HELL HOUND
Hell hounds are fire-breathing dogs of the underworlds or lower planes.  In addition to biting, they can breathe fire each round, inflicting 2hp damage per hit die (10ft range, saving throw for half damage).
Hell Hound (4HD): HD 4; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Breathe fire (8hp).
Hell Hound (5HD): HD 5; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Breathe fire (10hp).
Hell Hound (6HD): HD 6; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Breathe fire (12hp).
Hell Hound (7HD): HD 7; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Breathe fire (14hp).

HIEROGLYPHICROC
Raised by ancient methods long forgotten or suppressed, hieroglyphicrocs resemble zombie crocodiles, but they are actually more akin to mummies than to zombies, at least in terms of the preservation process. Their eyes glow with a yellow light, and they have rudimentary intelligence - often they are defenders of tombs where mummies are found. These creatures are highly immune to being turned, and attack with a bite that can swallow whole on a natural 20. It takes three rounds to completely swallow a victim, but the victim will turn into a zombie within 1d4+1 rounds after being swallowed. Then the hieroglyphicroc will disgorge it. The bite inflicts 2d6 damage. The dead skin of these creatures is often painted with hieroglyphs. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Hieroglyphicroc: HD 7; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 9; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: swallow whole on natural 20, transform stomach contents into zombie.

HIPPOCAMPUS
The hippocampus is a mythical sea-horse, with the body, head, and forelegs of a horse, but with the rear part of the body tapering to a fish’s tail.  They are at least as intelligent as a normal land-horse.  Some leaders might be extremely intelligent indeed.
Hippocampus: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite 1d4); Move (Swim 24); Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

HIPPOGRIFF
The hippogriff is similar to a griffon, having the head, foreclaws, and wings of an eagle, but instead of the body of a lion, it has the body of a horse.  The poem Orlando Furioso (written in 1516) suggests that the hippogriff is the offspring of a griffon and a horse – but they are apparently an independent breed, for folkloric tradition holds that griffons frequently attack hippogriffs.  Hippogriffs are not as hard to train as griffons – again, from Orlando Furioso: “Drawn by enchantment from his distant lair, The wizard thought but how to tame the foal; And, in a month, instructed him to bear Saddle and bit, and gallop to the goal; And execute on earth or in mid air, All shifts of manege, course and caracole…”
Hippogriff: HD 3; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (1d10); Move 18 (Fly 24); Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Flies.

HIPPOPOTAMUS
Hippopotami are very aggressive and territorial.  A herd may be led by a large bull with 8HD, a saving throw of 8, and damage of 3d6.
Hippopotamus: HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 6 (Swim 12); Save 9; CL/XP 7/600; Special: None.

HOBGOBLIN
Hobgoblins are simply large goblins, possibly a separate breed living apart from their smaller cousins, or perhaps not, as the GM decides.  As a matter of the campaign’s flavoring, the GM might choose to make hobgoblins the “fey” goblins of Irish legend, while regular goblins are the more Tolkien-style underground-dwellers.
Hobgoblin: HD 1+1; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 9; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

HOMUNCULUS
A homunculus is a living, man-like creature created by a powerful magic-user as a servant.  The precise abilities of a homunculus depend upon the spells and procedures used in its creation (the details of creating a homunculus are left to the game master), although virtually all are created with wings of some kind.  The most common homunculus has a sleep-inducing bite (saving throw), but others might be created with a poison bite (CL4/120XP), or might have unusual powers of perception instead (such as the ability to detect magic, evil, spells, etc).
Homunculus: HD 2; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d3 + sleep); Move 6 (Fly 20); Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Sleep-inducing bite.

HORSES:
Horse, Riding: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d2); Move 18; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None
Horse, War: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d2), 2 hooves (1d3); Move 18; Save 15; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

HOUND OF CHRONOS
Hounds of Chronos, also known as Temporal Dogs, are canine creatures from the Plane of Time (or a time-related other dimension). They posses the innate ability to manipulate time in a limited manner. Temporal Dogs hunt in packs that usually consist of 2 to 8 hounds. A Hound of Chronos will always know where, temporally, the other members of his pack are.  Hounds of Chronos possess the ability to move forward in time. Twice per day, a Hound of Chronos may “jump” forward in time. This allows the hound to disappear from the present and reappear 1d4 rounds later. The Hounds use this ability in conjunction with surprise to get the drop on their prey. When they re-materialise 1 to 4 rounds into the future, their prey has a chance of being surprised (60%).
Once per day, a Hound of Chronos may shift backward in time to when it was healthier, returning "immediately" with full hit points. (Contributed by Skathros).
Hounds of Chronos: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 claws (1d4/1d4), Bite (1d6); Move 18; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Temporal jump, Temporal heal.

HUMANS
Humans are such a versatile race that any number of “monsters” and NPCs can be made from them.  Berserker warriors, tribesmen, cavemen, princesses, evil high priests, captains of the guard, foot-soldiers, and tavern-keepers are all different human “monsters.”  Don’t try to build your non-player characters according to the rules for player characters.  Just make up their stats and abilities as you see fit.

HUMAN, BANDIT
Bandits are roving groups of thieves, sometimes organized into small armies led by more powerful bandit chiefs and captains with higher hit dice.
Human, Bandit: HD 1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

HUMAN, BERSERKER
Berserkers are normal humans, but they fight with astounding ferocity.  A bonus of +2 is added to their attack rolls.  They do not wear armor heavier than leather armor.
Human, Berserker: HD 1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: +2 to hit in berserk state.

HUMAN, SERGEANT-AT-ARMS
Human sergeants are normally found in command of 1d6+5 human soldiers.  These are the leaders of city guard units and other small military groups in castles and armies.
Human, Sergeant-at-Arms: HD 3; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 12; Save 15; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

HUMAN, MAN-AT-ARMS
Human soldiers serve as city guardsmen, mercenaries, and men-at-arms.  They are generally armed with leather armor and a mace, sword, or spear (don’t bother using damage from the specific weapon – just use a d8).  For every five guardsmen there is usually a sergeant.
Human, Soldier: HD 1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

HYDRA
Hydrae are great lizard-like or snake-like creatures with multiple heads.  Each head has one hit die of its own, and when the head is killed, that head dies.  The body has as many hit dice as the total of the heads, so it is a matter of good strategy for adventurers to focus either on killing heads (when all the heads are dead the body dies) or killing the creature by attacking the body (in which case the heads die, too).   Hydrae that breath fire or regenerate their heads are also known to exist.
Hydra (5 headed): HD 5; AC 5[14]; Atk 5 heads (1d6); Move 9; Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: None.
Hydra (6 headed): HD 6; AC 5[14]; Atk 6 heads (1d6); Move 9; Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: None.
Hydra (7 headed): HD 7; AC 5[14]; Atk 7 heads (1d6); Move 9; Save 9; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: None.
Hydra (8 headed): HD 8; AC 5[14]; Atk 8 heads (1d8); Move 9; Save 8; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: None.
Hydra (9 headed): HD 9; AC 5[14]; Atk 9 heads (1d8); Move 9; Save 6; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: None.
Hydra (10 headed): HD 10; AC 5[14]; Atk 10 heads (1d8); Move 9; Save 5; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: None.
Hydra (11 headed): HD 11; AC 5[14]; Atk 11 heads (1d10); Move 9; Save 4; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: None.
Hydra (12 headed): HD 12; AC 5[14]; Atk 12 heads (1d10); Move 9; Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: None.

HYENA
Hyenas are pack-hunters and scavengers, known for the eerie laughing sound they make.  They are not normally much of a threat, although they may attack weak-looking foes if they have sufficient numbers.
Hyena: HD 1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d3); Move 16; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

HYENA, GIANT
Giant hyenas stand 8ft tall at the shoulder, and are more aggressive than their normal cousins.  They might serve as mounts for tribes of gnolls in prehistoric or sword & sorcery campaigns.
Giant Hyena: HD 5; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 18; Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: None.

IGNIGUANA
Igniguanas are large lizards about six feet long, with reddish hide and glowing eyes. They may be of some sort of elemental origin, coupling attributes of fire and earth, for they crawl directly through solid rock without digging, leaving no tunnel behind to mark their passage. They breathe small but intense blasts of fire, in a cone extending 20ft to a width of 20ft. Anyone within the cone takes 2d6 hit points of damage (save for half). (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Igniguana: HD 4; AC 4 [15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 6; Save 14; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Breathes fire.

IMP
Imps are demonic creatures sent or summoned into the material plane.  They are about a foot tall, and have small but functional wings.  An imp can polymorph itself into one or two animal forms: a crow, goat, rat, or dog being common.  Imps regenerate 1 hit point per round, and can be hit only by silver or magical weapons (or by animals with 5+ hit dice).  In some cases, they may be forced to serve as a familiar to a powerful and evil magic user.
Imp: HD 2; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 sting (1d4 + poison); Move 6 (Fly 16); Save 16; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Poison tail, polymorph, regenerate, immune to fire.

INAED
Inaed are invisible, intangible spirits that inhabit books, scrolls and any other object upon which words are written. They possess no ability to attack directly; however, they can cast each of the following spells twice daily: Sleep, Phantasmal Force, and Suggestion. Inaed inhabiting a book or other object are entirely impervious to physical attacks, for an attack directed at the Inaed only damages the "home." If its host book is completely destroyed, the Inaed will flee in search of a new book to haunt - including spell books. Though they are not undead, Inaed may be cast out of the books they haunt with a successful turning attempt. Treat Inaed as though they were Ghouls for this purpose. Books that have been freed of any Inaed, and books that have been blessed by a Cleric of 9th level or higher, are immune to infestation. "Turned" or otherwise unbound Inaed immediately seek out the nearest book to inhabit. Entering a book takes 2d4 turns, and it is during this time that Inaed are most vulnerable. The creatures are visible during this time -- appearing as ghostly apparitions of adolescent human females -- and can be physically damaged, although only by magical weapons. (Contributed by Andrew Trent).
Inaed: HD 3; AC 0[20]; Atk none; Move 0 (Fly 18); Save 13; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Invisible, Spells, Immune to all weapons or to normal weapons (depending on state)

INNER CHILD
A parasitic organism that lies dormant inside a human host, an inner child can dimensionally shift itself outside of the host's body and return once per day. While outside it can levitate, but remains connected by a 6ft long psychic cord and cannot move further from the host than this. It resembles a smaller version of the host creature, but with a large head, feral features, and an almost vestigial body. The host creature is usually aware that it has an inner child, but (for obvious reasons) usually keeps it a dark secret.
An inner child has strong psionic abilities. It can read minds at will (per the ESP spell), "cast" charm person twice per day, cause a psychic blast at will (2d6 points of damage to all within a cone 60ft long and 60ft wide at the end, saving throw for half damage), and create a wall of mental force once per day (3ft thick, 50ft long and 50ft tall). If the host creature is killed, the inner child dies within 1d6 turns. (Contributed by Chad Thorson).
Inner child: HD 3; AC 3[16]; Atk psychic blast (2d6); Move 8; Save 14; CL/XP: 5/240; Special: ESP and psychic blast at will, charm person (2/day), and wall of mental force (1/day).

INVISIBLE STALKER
Invisible stalkers are generally only found as a result of the spell “Invisible Stalker.”  They are invisible flying beings created to follow a single command made by the caster.
Invisible Stalker: HD 8; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 “bite” (4d4); Move 0 (Fly 12); Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Invisible, flight.

IOUNIFIER
The IOUNifier is a small, intricate tangle of wires and filaments with infinitesimal motes of light dancing unpredictably within; they are no more than one inch in diameter. Their small size, coupled with the fact that they move very quickly, makes them difficult to hit with weapons. An IOUNifier projects a beam of bluish light; if any person is caught within the light, the shadow projected by the beam is a solid, material shape that manifests within one round. Once a person is caught within the light beam (requiring a successful to-hit roll by the IOUNifier), the IOUNifier can hold the person in the beam without further effort unless a wall or other very significant obstacle completely obstructs the beam. The projected "shadow" of the target is shaped exactly like the person being projected - it is constructed of wires that look like blood vessels running through and around whirring clockwork internal organs, and with a face-mask of bronze that resembles the face of the target in perfect detail. The shadow wears armor and carries equipment identical to the target's, but these do not duplicate any magical effects of the originals. The shadow has the same number of hit points as the living creature from which it is projected, and regenerates 3hp per round until it is killed. It will attack its original relentlessly until it is killed, whereupon it simply disappears. If the victim is killed by its projection, the projection will instantly fall upon the corpse, envelope it in its wires and filaments, and compress itself and the corpse into an IOUN stone. The IOUN stone will respond to the first person who picks it up, orbiting around that person's head, and granting a bonus to an attribute score for as long as it continues to circle. The attribute affected depends upon the person who is compacted into the stone; if that person was a cleric, the IOUN stone adds +1 to wisdom; if the victim was a magic-user, the stone adds +1 to intelligence; otherwise, the stone adds +1 to strength. These IOUN stones are not permanent, lasting only 1d4+1 days; some other, lost, procedure seems to be needed to make the stones last longer than this. The IOUNifier can only maintain two projections at any given time, and cannot make a second projection of the same person more than once per day. Note: attempts to use IOUNifiers for personal gain, especially by nefarious means, are quite dangerous - whatever programming drives the IOUNifier seems driven to cause ironic and dangerous consequences to those who try to manipulate them. The challenge level of an IOUNifier varies with its targets, and thus can't be calculated ahead of time. The XP value of an IOUNifier should be approximately the same as a monster with the same hit dice as the party has levels. (Matt Finch).
IOUNifier: HD 3; AC 0[19]; Atk none - by projection only; Move 0 (Fly 25); Save 5; CL/XP varies; Special: Improved saving throw, immune to electricity, projection beam.

JACK-IN-THE-BOX
At first glance, this critter appears as a brightly decorated box with a rotating handle at its side. With surprising quickness, a jester-like creature (mounted on a spring, of course!) springs from the box attacking and maiming. If concealed within its "box", a Jack-in-the-Box has a 50% chance of surprising its foes. This chance increases to 70% if the Jack-in-the-Box is released from the box via the rotating handle. When enclosed within its box, the Jack-in-the-Box AC becomes 3[16].
A Jack-in-the-Box may only move by hopping, carrying its cubic abode with him. (Contributed by Skathros).
Jack-in-the-Box: HD 2; AC 5[14]; Atk Dagger or other small bladed weapon (1d4); Move 6; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Surprise.

JACKAL
Small, dog-like scavengers, jackals present no significant threat to a well-armed party of humans.
Jackal: HD 1d4hp; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d2); Move 14; Save 18; CL/XP A/15; Special: None.

JACKAL OF DARKNESS
These creatures resemble jackals with black fur, limned with a black fire that sheds no light and burns black when the jackal emerges from the darkness. They haunt long-abandoned tombs, possibly being shackled to them as guardians by ancient magics - the relation of the jackals to their tomb-lairs is not known. They seem to be undead, in that they can be turned (as mummies), but do not appear to rot, nor do they seem to be incorporeal in any way. The black fire around the jackal acts almost like an independent creature; when the jackal is in combat, the black fire streams forth and can envelop one opponent (within 50ft of the jackal), causing 1 hit point of damage per round. The jackal can move the black fire where it wishes. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Jackal of Darkness: HD 4; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 14; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Black fire.

##Therianthrope, JACKALWERE
##A jackalwere is an evil spirit with the body of a jackal, but it can also assume a human form.  Jackalweres can cause sleep by looking deeply into a human’s eyes for a few moments (saving throw).  Jackalweres can only be damaged with silver or magical weapons.
##Jackalwere: HD 4; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (2d4); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Sleep gaze, hit by silver or magic weapons only.

JANNI
Jann are genies not tied to any particular element, unlike the efreet and the djinn.  Like other genies, they have magical powers: enlarge or shrink themselves, invisibility (5/day), and dimension door (1/day).  Jann can travel into the elemental planes, even bringing others with them, but they cannot remain more than an hour and a day in another plane of existence, or they will perish.
Janni: HD 6; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8+4); Move 12 (Fly 24); Save 11; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Genie powers.

JELLYFISH, HYPNOTIC
The colors of a hypnotic jellyfish are so soothing that anyone viewing this undersea predator must make a saving throw or fall into a dreamlike trance for 1d6 turns.  The jellyfish is very large, about the size of a man.
Hypnotic Jellyfish: HD 3; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 sting (1d8); Move 0 (Swim 3); Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Hypnotic colors.

KEEPER OF THE WELL
Keepers Of The Well are semi-intelligent water spirits that enter the material world at the behest of a powerful cleric. These spirits willingly enter into a contract with the spiritual leader who brought them forth, agreeing to be bound to a particular well or spring and defend it from all creatures not part of the local village or temple. In return for its service, the Keeper of the Well is freed from the slave-like existence it would normally have on its home place or in the spirit world. A village's Keeper of the Well is often worshipped as a minor deity. A Keeper of the Well appears as a large, snake-like column of water rising out of the opening of the well that it defends. They cannot leave the well, though they can manifest themselves from any opening tied to the local water system, instantly appearing at the desired location. Keepers of the Well are immune to fire and possess magic resistance of 75%. Spells that specifically affect water (such as Part Water) can be used to damage or affect a Keeper of the Well with results that may vary from the spell's normal operation. (Contributed by Andrew Trent).
Keeper of the Well: HD 9; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 "fist" (2d8); Move 0 (see text for special); Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Fire immunity, Magic resistance (75%), Water teleport.

KHEPH
The Kheph are jackal-headed humanoids with a sleek black covering of body fur.  Below the neck, the form of a Kheph’s body is very much like that of a muscular and well-proportioned human being, although they are larger (averaging 7 feet tall).  The Kheph are an ancient species, older than mankind, and they revere evil gods forgotten or never known by most living races.  Their supernatural link to planes of existence beyond material reality is very strong, and Kheph leaders are said to be able to shift between planes of existence with ease.
Warrior kheph have 8HD but no magical abilities.  They usually fight with scimitars, attacking twice per round, but may (20%) be armed with bows or (20%) with polearms.  Kheph priests cast spells as a cleric of 9th level, and in addition can (as an innate ability) cast Symbol of Pain and Plane Shift once per day.  Kheph Magi cast spells as a magic user of 10th level, and in addition can (as an innate ability) cast Symbol of Fear and Plane Shift once per day.  Kheph elders have the spell casting abilities of an 11th level cleric and magic user, and in addition can (as an innate ability) cast Symbol of Death and Plane Shift once per day.
Kheph, Warrior: HD 8; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 scimitars (1d8); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 8/800; Special: +2 to hit.
Kheph, Priest: HD 9; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 scimitar (1d8); Move 12; Save 6; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Spells as level 9 cleric, symbol of pain, plane shift.
Kheph, Mage: HD 10; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 scimitar (1d8); Move 12; Save 5; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Spells as level 10 magic-user, symbol of fear, plane shift.
Kheph, Elder: HD 11; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 scimitar (1d8); Move 12; Save 4; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: Spells as level 11 magic-user and level 11 cleric, symbol of death, plane shift.

KI-RIN
Ki-rin are wind spirits, looking much like a unicorn, but with dragon-like features such as golden-scaled skin, and having a huge, flowing mane.  Most are benevolent in nature, but they seldom interfere in the doings of humankind.  A ki-rin can cast spells as an 18th level cleric and as an 18th level magic user.
Cleric spells: 7/7/7/7/7/4/1
Magic-user spells: 6/6/6/6/6/5/2/2/1
A common selection of spells for a ki-rin might be as follows:
Cleric: Level 1: Cure Light Wounds (x2), Detect Evil, Detect Magic, Light, Protection From Evil, Purify Food and Drink, Level 2: Bless, Find Traps, Hold Person (x2), Silence, 15ft Radius, Snake Charm, Speak with Animals, Level 3: Continual Light, Cure Disease, Locate Object, Prayer, Remove Curse (x2), Speak with the Dead, Level 4: Create Water, Cure Serious Wounds (x2), Neutralize Poison, Protection From Evil 10 ft. Radius, Speak With Plants, Sticks to Snakes, Level 5: Commune, Create Food, Dispel Evil, Finger of Death, Insect Plague, Quest, Raise Dead, Level 6: Animate Object, Blade Barrier, Speak with Monsters, Word of Recall, Level 7: Control Weather.
Magic-user: Level 1: Charm Person, Detect Magic, Protection From Evil, Read Languages, Read Magic, Sleep, Level 2: ESP, Invisibility, Locate Object, Mirror Image, Phantasmal Force, Web, Level 3: Dispel Magic (x2), Fireball, Haste, Protection From Normal Missiles, Slow, Level 4: Confusion (x2), Fear, Plant Growth, Polymorph Other, Polymorph Self, Level 5: Conjure Elemental, Contact Other Plane, Telekinesis (x2), Teleport, Wall of Stone, Level 6: Death Spell, Disintegrate, Flesh to Stone, Legend Lore, Stone to Flesh, Level 7: Delayed Blast Fireball, Limited Wish, Level 8: Monster Summoning VI, Power Word Blind, Level 9: Time Stop.
Ki-rin: HD 12; AC –5[24]; Atk 1 horn (3d6), 2 hoofs (1d8); Move 18 (Fly 24); Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: Spells, magical powers, magic resistance (90%).

KOBOLD
Kobolds are subterranean, vaguely goblin-like humanoids.  They have a –1 penalty when fighting above ground.  Many use slings or short bows, and they fight with short swords or spiked clubs in melee combat.
Kobold: HD 1d4hp; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 6; Save 18; CL/XP A/15; Special: None.

KO'HAAI
Ko'haai are large, 6-legged lizards covered in scales that coruscate with varying hues of blue. They are normally found in tropical climates where they are used as riding animals and beasts of burden by the local populace. Ko'haai possess long, powerful tongues, used to make a whip-like attack. In addition to suffering damage, the victim of this attack may have his arms pinioned if the tongue wraps around him (saving throw at -2 penalty). The bite of a Ko'haai is mildly poisonous, inflicting 1d3 points of damage (saving throw at +2 negates), and the poison has a very strange property with repeated exposures. The skin of any person who has sustained 3 or more Ko'haai bites within a week takes on a discernible bluish cast, which persists for 3d8 weeks. After six successful saving throws made against Ko'haai poison, the body develops a permanent immunity to the damaging effects of the poison, and begins to treat the poison as a mild amphetamine, providing a +1 to attack rolls and saving throws for 1d4+2 hours after being bitten (the downside to this, of course, is the damage taken from the bite itself). (Contributed by Andrew Trent).
Ko'haai: HD 3; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d6 + poison) or 1 tongue (1d4 + pinion) ; Move 6; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Poison, pinion with tongue.

KOI FOLK
The Koi Folk are brightly colored humanoid goldfish, peaceful and amphibious peasants of Eastern lands, and generally pleasant to be around, if somewhat dull company. They are simple-minded and easily led, often prey to bullies like the Yurmp (see, "Yurmp") or haughty local nobility. Some monks will occasionally attempt to teach the Koi Folk martial arts, and instill the drive to stand up for themselves, only to give up in frustration at these creatures' blank-faced placidity. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Koi Folk: HD 2+1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 slap (1d3); Move 9 (Swim 12); Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

KOMODO DRAGON
Komodo dragons are very large lizards with a poisonous bite (saving throw).  Death from the poison takes place in 1d4 melee rounds after the bite.
Komodo Dragon: HD 2; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d6 + poison); Move 6; Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Poison bite.
Giant Komodo Dragon: HD 5; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (2d6 + poison); Move 9; Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Poison bite.

KRAKEN
Kraken are gigantic squid-like monsters of malign, genius-level intelligence, residing in the black depths of the oceans. When kraken strike with their tentacles, they may wrap their prey and constrict them each round for an automatic 2d6 damage, also making the victim defenseless against the kraken's bite. Ships may be constricted in the same way, typically requiring 18 tentacle-rounds to crush the vessel sufficiently to pull below to the kraken's expansive undersea lair. Tentacles may be targeted individually and severed. They each have AC 6[13] and 16 hit points, which are not considered part of the kraken's hit point total. Kraken retreat by jetting backwards, at which point they may release a poisonous 80ft x 80ft x 120ft ink cloud. For a total of four rounds, anyone within the cloud will suffer 1d4 points of damage. It is rumored that kraken possess unnatural powers to control weather and to create false lights in order to ambush or mislead sailors. (Contributed by Random).
Kraken: HD 20; AC 0[19]; Atk 6 tentacles (2d6), bite (3d6); Move (Swim 3) (Jet 21); Save 3; CL/XP 24/5600; Special: Ink cloud, constriction, control weather, create lights.

KUROK-SPIRIT
A kurok-spirit is a non-human spirit that manifests as a ghostly crocodile, limned with a transparent gray fire. Kuroks can only be damaged by silver or magic weapons (or by spells). Anyone within melee attack range of the creature must make a saving throw or be paralyzed by the ghost-flames around the spirit's crocodile body. When the kurok bites an opponent, the bite causes the temporary loss of 1d4 constitution points (recovered within 1d3 days); if a victim's constitution drops to 0 as the result of a kurok's bite, he dies and the spirit takes his soul to eat.
Kurok-Spirit: HD 3; AC 4[15]; Atk Bite (1d4 points of constitution); Move 9; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Drains constitution.

KZADDICH
This weird but benevolent race exists outside of the normal concept of time. They may come from the distant future, but could just as easily hail from the distant past or from an alternate reality altogether. When encountered, they are generally working to defy the plans of their arch-enemies, the Tsalakians (another trans-dimensional race of beings), and to organize resistance against them. The Kzaddich (singular and plural) always appear as man-sized figures, completely covered by cowled cloaks. Their own speech sounds not unlike wind chimes. When dealing with sentient creatures, they use their native telepathy. Their true form defies immediate description; uncloaked, they appear as an amalgamation of shifting, softly glowing spheres in a rough approximation of a bipedal form. The Kzaddich can slip in and out of the time-stream at will, and as a result they are exceedingly difficult to harm. They can anticipate the future actions of their opponents, resulting in their almost unhittable armor class. Moreover, they make saving throws as an 8HD creature and take half or no damage from damage-causing spells that allow saving throws, and are allowed a saving throw against spells that normally do not allow one - whether these spells cause damage or not. They are immune to all person-affecting spells (hold person, charm person, etc.) and cannot be affected by spells that affect time, such as slow or time stop. Indeed, Kzaddich can ignore the effects of these spells and even interrupt and share any beneficial effects of such magics. Kzaddich are loathe to engage in combat, but if forced, they have the innate spell-like ability to haste themselves at will. If faced with certain capture or death, a Kzaddich can, at will, simply slip into the far future or past to avoid the situation. Kzaddich have considerable mental powers. They can mentally alter the density of their bodies from a weight of 0 to 500 pounds at will, heal all damage they have suffered five times per day, levitate at will, communicate telepathically within 100ft with any creature, and read psychic impressions left upon objects. The Kzaddich do not perceive time the way others do; they can perceive the outlines of the future (90% chance to make the most favorable choice between two actions). Kzaddich can never be taken by surprise. Twice per day, a Kzaddich have the ability to create a time stop (as per the spell, with a duration of 2 combat rounds). A Kzaddich can share the time stop with another creature with which it is in physical contact. Almost nothing is known of the Kzaddich culture; they vie against the machinations of the Tsalakians on a scale that mortal creatures cannot comprehend, in a vast war that spans time and dimensions.  (Contributed by John Turcotte).
KZADDICH: HD 1+1; AC -8[27]; Atk 2 weapons (1d8); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Haste, improved saving throws, immune to person-affecting spells, immune to time spells, escape into future, mental powers, cannot be surprised, time stop (2/day).

LAMIA
Lamias are horrid, centaur-like creatures, always female.  Below the female human torso is the body of a beast, usually with a lion’s forelegs and the hindquarters of a horse – but the beast-like part can vary.  A lamia can cast charm person, charm monster, and suggestion once per day, these powers often being used to lure prey into the dismal and abandoned places where the lamia lairs.  In addition, the lamia’s touch drains a point of wisdom permanently from the victim.  Any victim whose wisdom falls to 3 or lower becomes the lamia’s slave (one or more such slaves might be used to guard the lair or even participate in luring victims to the place).
Lamia: HD 9; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 claws (1d6); Move 24; Save 6; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Spells, touch drains wisdom.

LAMPREY, GIANT
Giant lampreys are slow-moving eels with a toothy, sphincter-like mouth.  Once the monster scores a hit, it fastens to the victim and drains blood automatically each round thereafter until the victim is dead.  Normal lampreys aren’t really dangerous enough to merit a separate entry.
Lamprey, Giant: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move (Swim 9); Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Sucks blood.

LAMPREY, LIGHTNING
Lightning lampreys are floating creatures about three feet long that feed upon powerful electrical currents and lightning.  Schools of them drift along in the wake of storm clouds.  They are not normally encountered away from electrical storms (some may sniff their way down from higher altitudes if lightning is actually striking the ground).  However, they might be found in unusual magical environments where electrical discharges or lightning is plentiful.  Their bite inflicts one point of damage from the sharp teeth, but also delivers an electrical shock of 1d6hp.  Their bodies are extremely good electrical conductors.
Lamprey, Lightning: HD 1; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (1hp + 1d6 shock); Move (Fly 6); Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Electrical bite.

LEAPING MAW
A Leaping Maw is a weird form of parasite that has extra-dimensional properties. It is never encountered alone, as it requires a host of some form. A small creature can support only one Leaping Maw, but a medium-sized creature (such as a human) can support up to four, and a large creature can support nine or more. The Leaping Maw looks like a small, fanged mouth, rather wolf-like, sprouting from a host creature’s body. The body is a fist-sized lump, hidden within the host’s body, and the host must usually be slain in order to get to it. The Leaping Maw is able to teleport itself directly onto any flesh within 30ft, and if it scores three successful hits it has burrowed into the victim's flesh. It cannot attack anyone who is employing a protection from evil spell. Use of a dimension door within 10ft of a leaping maw kills one leaping maw per 3 levels of the caster. Teleport will drive them out from the host. If a leaping maw remains in a host for a week, the host begins to experience surreal and vivid dreams and hallucinations that cause a permanent loss of 1 Wisdom point per leaping maw per month. When the victim reaches wisdom of 0, he becomes completely controlled by the parasites, a puppet for breeding and transmission. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Leaping Maw: HD 1; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 0 (Teleport 30ft); Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Teleport, occupy host, attack against unarmored AC.

LEECH, GIANT
Giant leeches are about one and a half feet long per hit die.  After they score a hit, they drain blood automatically at one hit point per hit die of the creature.  These are nasty creatures to find inhabiting the murky, muddy waters of a dungeon or swamp.
Leech, Giant (1HD): HD 1; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 3; Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Sucks blood (1hp/round).
Leech, Giant (2HD): HD 2; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 3; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Sucks blood (2hp/round).
Leech, Giant (3HD): HD 3; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 3; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Sucks blood (3hp/round).
Leech, Giant (4HD): HD 4; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 3; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Sucks blood (4hp/round).
Leech, Giant (5HD): HD 5; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 3; Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Sucks blood (5hp/round).
Leech, Giant (6HD): HD 6; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 3; Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Sucks blood (6hp/round).

LEOPARD
Leopards are small, roaring great cats, standing about 2ft tall at the shoulder.  They are not quite as fast as the other great cats, but they are stealthy hunters.
Leopard: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d6); Move 16; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

LEPHANE
The Lephane is a semi-aquatic relative of the Elephant, adapted for dwelling in rivers and lakes. The main body, resembling a boulder, is a shrivelled and shrunken mass, although it is still almost the size of a normal elephant's. The head is barely recognizable as an elephant’s, as the ears are atrophied lumps; the trunk is much longer than that of a normal elephant. The lephane attacks by grabbing and constricting with its long, muscular trunk from underwater. Once it has struck, it can apply continuous damage per round and can drag victims underwater. If the lephane manages to drag its prey all the way to its mouth, it can also bite for 1d6 damage. In general, any creature attacking it while it is in the water will suffer a -2 penalty to hit and damage (except with spears or other good underwater weapons). Breaking free from the lephane’s trunk can be managed on a roll of 1-2 on a d6.
The lephane is an accomplished swimmer, but lazy. It prefers to walk along a river bottom, poking the tip of its trunk above the water to breathe. Like its land-bound kin, it has ivory tusks that will fetch a fine reward: 100-400gp per tusk. Unlike its land-bound kin, the lephane is omnivorous; it can survive on roots and leaves, but it prefers fresh meat. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Lephane: HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 trunk (2d4+constriction), 1 bite (1d6); Move 6; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Constriction, pull beneath water.

LEPRECHAUN
Leprechauns are fey creatures, usually portrayed as irrational and possibly quite malevolent (although they have the common fey characteristic of being bound by bargains they make).  They are somewhat magic resistant (10%), and are extremely elusive.  They can become invisible and dimension door at will.  They can also cast phantasmal force once per day.
Leprechaun: HD 1; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 18; Save 15; CL/XP 5/400; Special: Magic resistance (10%), magic abilities.

LEUCROTA
The leucrota has a badger’s head and a lion’s body, but with cloven hooves instead of claws.  Its toothy mouth stretches from ear to ear (and delivers a deadly bite).  The original description of a leucrota comes from Pliny the Elder, writing in the first century.
Leucrota: HD 6; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (3d6); Move 18; Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: None.

LICH
Liches are the undead remnants of wizards, either made undead by their own deliberate acts during life, or as the result of other magical forces (possibly including their own magics gone awry).  A lich has the same spell-casting powers as the original magic-user (the same level as the lich’s hit dice).  A lich’s touch causes paralysis with no saving throw, and the very sight of one of these dread creatures causes paralysis in any being of 4HD or below.  Liches are highly malign and intelligent.
Lich (12HD): HD 12; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 hand (1d10 + automatic paralysis); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: Appearance causes paralytic fear, touch causes automatic paralysis, spells.
Lich (13HD): HD 13; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 hand (1d10 + automatic paralysis); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 16/3200; Special: Appearance causes paralytic fear, touch causes automatic paralysis, spells.
Lich (14HD): HD 14; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 hand (1d10 + automatic paralysis); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 17/3500; Special: Appearance causes paralytic fear, touch causes automatic paralysis, spells.
Lich (15HD): HD 15; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 hand (1d10 + automatic paralysis); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 18/3800; Special: Appearance causes paralytic fear, touch causes automatic paralysis, spells.
Lich (16HD): HD 16; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 hand (1d10 + automatic paralysis); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 19/4100; Special: Appearance causes paralytic fear, touch causes automatic paralysis, spells.
Lich (17HD): HD 17; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 hand (1d10 + automatic paralysis); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 20/4400; Special: Appearance causes paralytic fear, touch causes automatic paralysis, spells.
Lich (18HD): HD 18; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 hand (1d10 + automatic paralysis); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 21/4700; Special: Appearance causes paralytic fear, touch causes automatic paralysis, spells.

LINNORM
Linnorms look like massive serpents with draconic heads. Linnorms never speak, nor do they have spell-casting ability. Linnorms attack with their bite which deals grievous damage and injects a deadly poison into their opponents (save or die). A linnorm may also constrict an opponent for 3d4 points of damage per round. If a linnorm attacks with its bite and 4 or more than the number needed in rolled on its attack dice, the victim is swallowed whole. Swallowed victims suffer 2d4 hit points of damage per round and may only strike back at the linnorm with short weapons. The inside of a linnorm is considered armor class 8[11].
Linnorms share the size categories and age categories of dragons. They are deaf, detecting heat and vibration, and are therefore unaffected by silence and invisibility. Thrice per day, linnorms may breath a cloud of poisonous gas 30ft long, 20ft wide, and 10ft high, that deals damage equal to the linnorm's full hit points (save for half damage). Linnorms may not be subdued and are immune to poison. They are excellent swimmers and sometimes lair in or near large bodies of water. (Contributed by John Turcotte, © 2006).
Adult Linnorm (7HD): HD 7; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 bite (3d6 + poison) and 1 constrict (3d4); Move 12 (Swim 12); Save 9; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Poison, constrict, swallow whole, immune to poison, silence and invisibility, breath weapon.

LION
A lioness has an AC of 7[12], but is otherwise similar to the male lion.
Lion: HD 5+2; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d8); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: None.

LITHONNITE
Lithonnites are huge mollusk-like creatures, about one ton in weight, living in subterranean and surface environments. The front of a lithonnite’s body is encased in a powerful shell, even to the rock-like eyelids. When the rest of the lithonnite’s body is concealed in a grotto or under water, the shell appears like a boulder or other natural rock. It is not possible for the lithonnite to draw its soft body entirely into the shell. In combat, the lithonnite reaches around its shell with two slug-like tentacles to attack. The creature’s frontal portion, protected by the shell, can be attacked by any sort of weapon; behind the shell, the soft body is AC 6[13], but cannot be affected by blunt weapons due to its boneless consistency. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Lithonnite: HD 8; AC 2[17] (frontal shell), 6[13] (body); Atk 2 tentacles (2d6); Move 9; Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Body immune to blunt weapons.

LIZARD SAMURAI
Lizard samurai come from some unknown race of bipedal lizards, possibly from the spirit world, possibly from another dimension, possibly from far lands. They are only encountered in elaborate armor, bearing sharp swords and sometimes with longbows. Lizard samurai follow a strict code of combat, but consider humans of non-fighting social class to be animals virtually beneath their notice. When venturing into human lands, they are normally formed into well-organized military units, sometimes with members of some other race serving as auxiliary troops. These military units generally consist of at least 20 of the lizard samurai, and are always led by a captain with 6 hit dice. Lizard samurai make all saving throws at +1 (reflected in the statistics below). (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Lizard Samurai: HD 3; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 sword (1d8) or 2 arrows (1d6); Move 9; Save 13; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Improved saving throw.
Lizard Samurai Captain: HD 6; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 sword (1d8) or 2 arrows (1d6); Save 10; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Improved saving throw.

LIZARD, GIANT (REGULAR)
Giant lizards (as described here) are about 4ft tall at the shoulder (not quite large enough to ride).  Larger specimens could certainly be found – perhaps they continue to grow throughout their long lives, leading to giant lizards of close to saurian dimensions.
Giant Lizard: HD 3; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d8); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

LIZARD, LIGHTNING
Lightning lizards stand 5ft in height and may reach a length of 14ft. Their scales are a shimmering blue and sparks of lightning constantly crackle around their maw. Lightning lizards have sometimes been used as mounts for powerful orcish chiefs or tribal lords.
A lightning lizard may spew a crackling stream of lightning to assault its foes twice per day. A successful save halves the damage. Lightning lizards are immune to electrical based attacks or spells.
A rare breed of flying lightning lizards are known to exist. They are identical to their earthbound kin with the addition of massive wings which give them a flying movement of 18 (which adjusts the CL/XP to 8/800).  (Contributed by Skathros).
Lizard, Lightning: HD 5; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d8) or Lighting Blast (4d6); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Lightning blast.

LIZARDMAN
Lizardmen are reptilian humanoids, usually living in tribal villages in the depths of fetid swamps. Some can hold their breath for long durations (an hour or more), while others can actually breathe underwater.
Lizardman: HD 2+1; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d6); Move 6 (Swim 12); Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Breathe underwater.

LURKER, CEILING
Lurkers resemble floating manta rays, with a rough, stone-like undersurface.  They levitate to ceiling-tops and wait for prey to walk underneath, whereupon they drop and enfold the victim in their thick “wings” (to-hit roll).  Anyone trapped inside a lurker’s clutches takes 1d6 points of damage per round from crushing, and will suffocate within 1d4+1 rounds unless the lurker is killed.  There is normally only a 10% chance to detect a lurker’s presence visually before it attacks, and it has a 65% chance to gain initiative automatically (unless a “surprise roll” system is being used, in which case the lurker has a 4 in 6 chance to gain surprise).
Ceiling Lurker: HD 10; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 crush (1d6); Move 1 (Fly 7); Save 5; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Smother.

LYCANTHROPES
Lycanthropes are were-creatures, particularly those in whom the disease permits assumption of a hybrid form of the human and animal.  They can be hit by normal weapons, but silver weapons might inflict additional damage.  If any character is brought below 50% hit points by a lycanthrope, the character will become a lycanthrope himself.

LYCANTHROPE, WEREBEAR
Werebears can take the form of a bear or a human.
Werebear: HD 7+3; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (2d4); Move 9; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Lycanthropy.

LYCANTHROPE, WEREBOAR
Wereboars can take the form of a boar, a human, or a boar-like biped.
Wereboar: HD 5+2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Lycanthropy.

LYCANTHROPE, WERERAT
Wererats can control rats, and are extremely stealthy (surprising opponents on 1-4 on a d6).
Wererat: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d3), 1 weapon (1d6); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Lycanthropy, control rats, surprise.

LYCANTHROPE, WERETIGER
Weretigers can assume the form of a tiger, a human, or a bipedal, tiger-like hybrid of the two forms.
Weretiger: HD 6; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d10); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Lycanthropy.

LYCANTHROPE, WEREWEASEL
Wereweasels tend to be aggressive, cruel and vicious. In their lycanthrope form, they are sleek and quick, biting for 2d4 hit points of damage in addition to any weapons they may wield. They continue to drain blood after a successful bite, inflicting an additional 2d4 points of damage per melee round until slain or until they release their prey. As with other were-creatures, the bite also has a chance to inflict lycanthropy. These lithe creatures are fast, gaining a +1 bonus on initiative rolls. Wereweasels are often found with 1d4 giant weasels, which obey their commands. In human form, wereweasels tend to be thin and wiry, dark of aspect with sharp features. (Contributed by John Turcotte).
Were-weasel: HD 3+2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6) and weapon (1d8); Move 15; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Drain blood, lycanthropy, +1 initiative, hit only by magical or silver weapons.

LYCANTHROPE, WEREWOLF
Werewolves can assume the form of a wolf, a human, or a wolfman hybrid of the two forms.
Werewolf: HD 4+4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+1); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Lycanthropy.

LYNX, GIANT
If a giant lynx hits with both of its front claws, it can make 2 more attacks with its rear claws.
Giant Lynx: HD 2; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d2), 1 bite (1d4); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Rear claws.

MACAW, GIANT
Giant macaws are not predators, but they are highly territorial and very dangerous, being as large as a tall man.  They have brilliant green, blue, or red plumage, and are generally found in tropical regions.  The giant macaw attacks with a wickedly powerful beak.  They are ordinarily found in mated pairs, and their feathers can usually be sold for a tidy sum.
Giant Macaw: HD 5; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 beak (1d10); Move 6 (Fly 20); Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: None.

MALCARNA
Malcarnae are female creatures with a four-armed human torso and the lower body of a great, writhing serpent, fifteen feet long. These horrible creatures are one of the many possible teratomorphs that may result from human congress with demons, most commonly an incubus. In some cases they may also be hatched from clutches of eggs laid by Marilith demons following events too hideous to contemplate. When they are born into any but the most depraved human societies they are usually killed at birth, so they are seldom found upon the material planes. Malcarnae generally arm themselves with a shield and three weapons, and can also attack with their lashing tails for 1d8 points of damage. Despite the horrible shape of these creatures, they are obscenely beautiful; creatures of fewer than 4 hit dice cannot attack them, and opponents with 4 or more hit dice must make a saving throw to succeed with any attempted physical attack. They are immune to normal weapons (other than silver ones) and have magic resistance of 25%. The human parentage of the malcarnae prevents them from being turned by a cleric. Some malcarnae may have clerical spell casting ability. (Contributed by Matt Finch, first appeared in Footprints magazine).
Malcarna: HD 5; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 tail (1d8) and up to 3 weapons (1d8); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Magic resistance 25%, hit only by magic or silver weapons.

MALFORMIAN
Malformians are the result of magical breeding experiments. They are ugly human-like creatures, often of misshapen proportions, crossbred by insane wizards from humans, goblinoids, animals, and even beings summoned from other worlds. No two malformians look alike; one might be covered in warts and tufts of fur, a second might have useless atrophied wings growing from its back, a third might have eyes and hands of mismatched sizes, and so on. Their various deformities tend to hinder their movement. Any weapons and possessions will be makeshift in nature, such as clubs, staves, crudely stitched cloaks, etc. Gangs of malformians make hideouts in wilderness ruins or subterranean lairs; they do not interact with civilization except as occasional predators and raiders. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr"). 
Malformian: HD 1+2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 9; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

MAMMOTH
Mammoths are huge, shaggy precursors to elephants, larger and more feral, with great, curving tusks.  They might be trained as mounts by snow-barbarians.
Mammoth: HD 12; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 trunk (1d10), 2 gore (1d10+4), 2 trample (2d6+4); Move 12; Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: None.

MANTICORE
A horrid monster with bat wings, the face of a feral human, the body of a lion, and a tail tipped with 24 iron spikes.  The manticore can hurl up to 6 of the iron spikes from its tail per round, at a maximum range of 180ft.
Manticore: HD 6+4; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d8), 6 tail spikes (1d6); Move 12 (Fly 18); Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Flies, tail spikes.

MANTIS, GIANT PRAYING
The giant praying mantis is ten feet long, with a bark-like exoskeleton which makes it blend well into forest terrain (desert varieties have chitin with a sand-like texture).  The huge insect attacks with blinding speed, usually by surprise, reaching forth with its jointed, serrated front limbs to grab prey.  If the mantis hits, and the victim fails a saving throw, the forearms not only do damage but pull the victim close to the mantis’ mouth.  The victim is held thereafter (not helpless, but unable to pull away) with the mantis doing automatic damage with the serrated forearms and also attacking with its bite for an additional 1d12 points of damage if the bite hits.
Giant Praying Mantis: HD 8; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 grab (1d12); Move 9; Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Grab and bite.

MARROSIAN STATUE
Marrosian Statues are animated statues of human warriors created from a rare, magical marble-like stone frequently used by a lost civilization. Marrosian Statues move with a silent, fluid grace that belies their inorganic nature. Creatures damaged by a Marrosian Statue must make a saving throw or suffer from a deep, soul-chilling cold that radiates outward from the wound. Failure results in a -2 to all subsequent saving throws and combat rolls. This penalty dissipates over the course of the following 24 hours.
Marrosian Statues are partially immune to damage from slashing and piercing weapons, taking only half damage from these sources. (Contributed by Andrew Trent).
Marrosian Statue: HD 3; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 stone weapon (1d8); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Soul Chill, Slashing/Piercing Resistance.

MAUN-GE
The Maun-Ge are transparent-skinned humanoids. They live alone among humans in remote settlements, usually wearing lacquered wooden masks and an enveloping outer garment that cloaks the entire body. All Maun-Ge are female and will eventually mate with a human male to produce a sole Maun-Ge child. They are able to commune with the spirits of their ancestors who offer guidance, praise and censure to their descendant. With the ability to draw upon the knowledge and experience of their forebears, the Maun-Ge are revered as sages and storytellers. Those who interact with them at length come away feeling somewhat enlightened (+1 wisdom for 2d4 days). The Maun-Ge know the True Names of all men (treat as a Geas Spell), using this knowledge to command humans to play a part in their schemes to increase and perpetuate their bloodline’s influence, status and power. (Contributed by Sean Wills).
Maun-Ge: HD 1; AC 9[10]; Atk dagger (1d4); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Geas.

##CLOCKWORKS Clockworks are, effectively, magically-constructed robots.  They
##are not merely animated, for they have a mechanical component to their
##operations, but these mechanical components require magic in order to
##function.
##
##CLOCKWORK, BRONZE COBRA
##Bronze cobras are similar to iron cobras, built in ancient days by powerful spell casters as mechanical servants using powerful magic.  These jointed snakes are the size of a normal cobra, and follow commands given to them or programmed into them by their creators.  Bronze cobras are not as lethal as iron cobras, being made of softer metal and having a five-dose supply of paralysis poison (3d6 turns) rather than a three-dose supply of lethal poison.  They are, however, faster than the similar mechanism created from iron.
##Clockwork, Bronze Cobra: HD 2; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 bite (1d2 + poison); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Non-lethal paralysis poison.
##
##CLOCKWORK, CAVALIER
##A clockwork cavalier is a metallic humanoid (usually plated with tarnished bronze), elaborately forged to resemble a handsome moustached gentlemen, with a winding mechanism (a key) in its back between the shoulder blades, and armed with a sword extending from its right forearm. Once it has been wound up, the cavalier will wait in place until it can perceive a male humanoid armed with a sword, whom it will challenge to fight a duel to the death. If the opponent declines, the cavalier will accuse him with cowardice, and attack the following round. During combat the Cavalier will mock its opponent with a selection of insults and taunts. Any other combatants striking the Cavalier will also become targets. A Cavalier never flees from a fight.
##The cavalier grows slower as it winds down. Each successive round it is in combat it gains a -1 to hit and to its movement rate. Eventually it comes to a complete halt (once movement rate reaches 0, in 12 rounds) and is thereafter totally unable to move or fight (although the insults continue for a further 1d4 rounds). Clockwork cavaliers are immune to Sleep, Charm and Hold, and to all non-magical piercing weapons. Any two-handed sword or axe that hits has a 1 in 6 chance of beheading the Cavalier - which causes it to halt and then explode within the next round (burst radius 20ft, 1d6 damage - a successful saving throw means that a person caught in the blast only takes half damage). (Contributed by Sean Wills).
##Clockwork, Cavalier: HD 5; AC 3[16]; Atk: 1 sword (1d8); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Slows down, immune to sleep, charm, hold, and non-magical piercing weapons, explodes if beheaded.
##
##CLOCKWORK, GIANT
##Throughout time, every evil genius yearns deep in his heart to create a giant robot armed with a heat ray and machine guns - even (or perhaps especially) in worlds where the height of technology is represented by hammer-pounded iron, waterwheels, and crossbows. With the aid of magic, madness, and perseverance, however, some such evil geniuses succeed in the task against all odds. And then, there might be beings who live in the deserts of Mars, and beyond the dark void of the night sky. One never knows. Giant robots are 13-15 ft. tall. They tend to be sleek in design and most highly advanced. These heavy combat robots have machine guns for hands (each making four attacks per turn), a chest-mounted mortar (damages all in a 5ft radius of the target), and can fire a cone of heat from its head that is 90ft long and 30ft wide at its end, that inflicts hit points equal to the robot's initial hit points (save for half damage). (Contributed by Scottenkainen).
##Clockwork, Giant: HD 15; AC 2[17]; Atk 8 machine gun shots (2d6), mortar (4d6); Move 12; Save 3; CL/XP 19/4100; Special: Heat ray.
##
##CLOCKWORK, IRON COBRA
##Iron cobras are a type of eldritch mechanism, created by the great wizards of yore using formulae from their legendary spellbooks and tomes of knowledge.  They are jointed constructions of iron, the size of a normal cobra, that slither and attack as commanded (perhaps eons in the past) by their makers.  The iron cobra contains a reservoir with three doses of lethal venom.  Larger specimens might have been built, with an addition venom dose per additional hit die.
##Clockwork, Iron Cobra : HD 3; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 bite (1d4 + poison); Move 9; Save 11; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Poison.

MEDUSA
Medusae are horrid creatures with a female face but hair of writhing snakes; they have no legs, but the body of a serpent.  The gaze of a medusa turns anyone looking upon it into stone.   In addition to the medusa’s relatively weak melee-weapon attack, the snake-hair makes one attack per round, causing no damage but delivering a lethal poison with a successful hit (saving throw applies).
Medusa: HD 6; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d4); Move 9; Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Gaze turns to stone, poison.

MELGARA
The Melgara (singular and plural) are a humanoid race from an alternate world. They appear to be tall, slender, blue-skinned women, dressed in silvery-grey robes and sandals, with long pale hair, and slitted eyes. They have six digits per extremity, plus an extra thumb on the left hand, and live for 200 to 350 years. All members of the Melgara race are mystical and introspective by nature, given to meditating upon philosophy, cosmology, and emotional awareness. They consider most other races to be psychologically impaired, and will communicate with them as condescending parents or teachers to slow or stunted children. The Melgara arm themselves with staffs and wands of a strange, durable crystal found on their world. The staff deals 2d4 damage. The wand, when used as a striking weapon, deals 1d4 damage in addition to 1d4 rounds of a Slowing effect or a Stunning effect (saving throw negates). The Melgara can also channel mental energy through these crystal weapons (3 times per day), causing any one of the following more powerful effects with a successful attack: (1) Paralysis for 1 turn, (2) Sleep for 1 hour, or (3) Charm for 1 full day. Each member of the race has spell ability equal to a cleric of level 2, and some have spell casting ability of up to level 5. They do not, however, have the ability to turn undead. In addition to clerical spell casting, all melgara can cast the magic-user spells sleep, shield, blur, and ESP, although these spells take up a clerical spell "slot". Once per day, they can increase their own speed, allowing a bonus of 2 to armor class (AC 5[14]). In any group of melgara, one will possess a crystal pendant or silvery rod of unusual design. These items have no combat function, being ceremonial devices on the Melgaran homeworld. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Melgara: HD 3+2; AC 7[12] or 5[14]; Atk 1 staff (2d4) or wand (1d4 + stun or slow); Save 14; Move 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Spells (1 level 1), mentally augmented attack (hold, sleep, or charm), increase speed.

MELHUKISKATA (Sap-Snatcher)
The hunters of the northernmost forests share that terrain with many strange and dangerous beasts. One such predator is the melhukiskata, or "sap snatcher."
So stealthy is the melhukiskata that it is rare for one to be spotted on the move. Those who have seen them report that its body is three feet long, shaped like a weasel or badger, but can walk like a bear. It is covered with shaggy, grey-brown fur all over, down to the tip of its two-foot long tail. Its mouth is elongated and oddly eel-like, while its feet are wickedly taloned. The most unusual features of the beast, though, are its fingers -- for instead of forepaws, the melhukiskata has fingered hands. Odder still, the fingers are long and stiff, and grow out like antlers. The longest of these antler-like fingers yet seen on a melhukiskata were five feet long.
The sap on the hands holds fast anyone touched and also is a weakening contact poison (save vs. poison or lose 1d6 points of strength per round, causing loss of consciousness at 2 strength or lower). Anyone so held can be automatically bitten each round and will be held until the melhukiskata is killed, the adhesive is burned away, or is washed off with vinegar or alcohol. All lost points of strength will be regained in 1d6 hours.
Tracking the melhukiskata is difficult, for when it does travel it often walks backwards, dragging its huge fingers behind it as if to sweep away its trail. Perhaps because of this so many folktales describe the melhukiskata as a clever animal. More likely, such behavior is instinctive. In no other regard does it appear to be smarter than a dog. (Contributed by Scottenkainen).
Melhukiskata: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 antler-hand (0), bite (1d6-1); Move 9; Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Strength-draining poison, holds fast.

MERMAN
Mermen have the torso of a man and the lower body of a fish.
Merman: HD 1+3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 1 (Swim 18); Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Breathe water.

MIMIC
Mimics are formless creatures that imitate surrounding features they have seen.  In subterranean settings, they might be disguised as an archway, treasure chest, door, etc.  When touched, they glue themselves to the victim with a strong adhesive, while striking with a suddenly-formed tentacle.
Mimic: HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 smash (2d6); Move 2; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Mimicry, glue.

MIND EATER
Mind eaters are a deep-dwelling, chthonic race of ancient and very evil beings.  They have a tentacled, cephalopodic head upon a tall but human-like body coated in protective slime.  This race considers all other intelligent races as nothing more than a source of slaves and of the mind eaters’ food source – brains.  Mind eaters attack with their four face-tentacles.  If even one of these hits, it worms its way toward the victim’s brain, yanking it forth from the skull in 1d4 rounds.  In addition, the mind eater uses a powerful mental blast, a 60ft cone 5ft wide at the point of emanation and 20ft wide at the end.  This power can be used once per day (see effects below).  Mind eaters have magic resistance of 90%, and their mental powers allow them to evoke the effects of the following spells: Levitate, Charm Monster, ESP, and Astral Spell.

Effect of Mental Blast:
1-2 creatures in area: Natural 1 on saving throw = death, Failed save = stunned 3d6 turns, Successful save = panic for 1d10 rounds.
3-4 creatures in area: Natural 1 on saving throw = stunned 3d6 turns, Failed save = panic for 3d6 turns, Successful save = confused for 1d10 rounds.
5+ creatures in area: Natural 1 on saving throw = panicked for 3d6 turns, Failed save = confused for 1d6 turns, Successful save = confused for 1d6 rounds.
Mind Eater: HD 8; AC 5[14]; Atk 4 tentacles (2hp); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Magic resistance (90%), mental blast, mental powers, eat brains.

MINOTAUR
The minotaur is a man-eating predator, with the head of a bull and the body of a massive human, covered in shaggy hair.  Most are not particularly intelligent.
Minotaur: HD 6+4; AC 6[13]; Atk Head butt (2d4), 1 bite (1d3) and 1 weapon (1d8); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Never get lost in labyrinths.

MIRROR FIEND
Mirror fiends inhabit mirrors. They appear as emotionless humans staring out of the reflective surface to the world beyond. If a mirror fiend locks his gaze with someone looking into the mirror, the victim must make a successful saving throw or have his soul sucked into the mirror, while his body remains motionlessly staring at himself in the mirror. While within the mirror, the victim's actions are controlled by his immobilized self as the mirror fiend attacks the victim's mirror-self. The victim's mirror-self suffers -4 to his first attack due to being unfamiliar with the mirror-image environment, but the penalty is reduced by 1 in each subsequent round. Should the immobilized victim's gaze be moved away from his mirror-self, he will no longer be able to control his movements within the mirror, and the mirror-self will become a motionless target for the mirror fiend. Slaying the mirror fiend will restore the victim's soul to his body, but shattering the mirror will forever trap the soul within the mirror. Mirror fiends are immune to attacks from normal weapons, and are 50% resistant to magic. Weapons used from outside will likely shatter the mirror, and spells used from the outside will reflect back upon the caster rather than enter the mirror-realm. (Contributed by Skathros).
Mirror Fiend: HD 8; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 mirror weapon (3d4); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 12/1400; Special: Unaffected by normal weapons, 50% magic resistance.

MOGURA-JIN
Cannibal Mole-men (Asian)
Mogura-Jin are a race of subterranean humanoids descended from a group of villagers who resorted to cannibalism during a particulary fierce winter and were cursed by the Gods. They are squat beings, between 4 and 5 feet tall with pale skin, small beady red eyes, no body hair, and nails overgrown to claws. Mogura-Jin are always hungry and need to consume human flesh every so often to remain alive. Like their animal namesake (the mole) they are proficient tunnelers and their prefered method of attacking their victims is to tunnel under them and emerge from the ground in a swarm attack to surprise them.
Mogura-Jin can see perfectly well even in total darkness; however their over-sensitive eyes are easily blinded by bright lights. (Contributed by edsan).
Mogura-jin: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 claws (1d4); Move 9; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Blinded by bright light, burrowing.

## MOLD, BROWN
## Within 5ft of a patch of brown mold, the mold drains body heat from living creatures (other than creatures which use magical cold or have cold breath weapons, such as a white dragon).  Damage from the heat drain is 2d8 hit points per round with no saving throw.  If fire comes in contact with the mold, the mold grows to cover an area twice its original size, boiling forth into new areas and beginning to suck heat from them in the following round.  Growths of brown mold can only be killed by the use of magical cold.
## Mold, Brown : HD n/a; AC n/a; Atk none; Move 0; Save n/a; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Drains heat.

MOLD, YELLOW
Yellow mold is a subterranean fungus; it neither moves nor attacks.  However, if it is poked or struck, it may (50% chance) release a cloud of poisonous spores, roughly 10ft in diameter.  Failing a saving throw against the spores means that the character dies a rather horrible death.  Touching yellow mold causes 1d6 points of acid damage.  These growths can be destroyed with fire, but are effectively immune to weapons.
Mold, Yellow : HD n/a; AC n/a; Atk 1d6 damage + spore cloud; Move 0; Save n/a; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Poisonous spore cloud, killed by fire.

MONSTROUS MOUTH
A bulbous body twelve feet in diameter, resting atop tiny legs, a monstrous mouth is almost entirely a huge, gaping maw equipped with rows upon rows of sharp, pointed teeth. Atop the strange creature's body, two short eye-stalks allow it to see its prey, even in total darkness. Each of these eye-stalks can discharge a sleep ray, causing potential prey to fall into a deep slumber; this requires a successful attack roll by the monstrous mouth, but no saving throw is permitted. The slumber is identical to that caused by a magic-user's sleep spell, but affects creatures with any number of hit dice. Each eye-stalk can use a sleep ray only once per day.
Another, even stranger, ability is the monstrous mouth's capacity to inhale with such force that a specific target up to 30ft away may be sucked into the creature's toothy maw. A successful attack roll by the monstrous mouth, followed by a failed saving throw on the part of the victim, will result in the victim being "sucked" into the creature's mouth. Once the victim is sucked in, the monstrous mouth constricts its interior to pin the victim, suffocating him in 1d4+2 rounds. A successful saving throw is required to escape. Each round spent trapped within a monstrous mouth will inflict damage equal to 1d6, +1hp if the victim is wearing leather armor, +2 if the victim is wearing metal armor other than plate mail, and +3 if the victim is wearing plate mail. (Contributed by Skathros).
Monstrous Mouth: HD 6; AC 3[16]; Atk Bite (4d6) or special; Move 6; Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Slumber rays, Inhale.

MOTHDOG
Feathery and brightly fluttering, the mothdog is, as its name suggests, a magical crossbreed of moth and dog. The head has compound eyes and feelers; otherwise the creature looks like a greenish-feathered dog. Mothdogs can be tamed, due to their canine intelligence. However, these creatures are insects that lay eggs and undergo a larval stage. A mothdog can emit a piercing high-pitched sound, primarily as a warning signal; if maintained for more than one round, it may cause disorientation and temporary deafness to all within a radius of 5ft per mothdog in the group. Some forest folk, particularly nocturnal humanoids, use mothdogs as guard dogs. The combination of canine scent and bat-like echolocation makes the mothdog a superb tracker; some wilderness villages have been known to employ them as tracking beasts. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Mothdog: HD 2+2; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 18; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Moth-scream.

MOTHMERE
Little is known about these eerie and malevolent beings. Their appearance in a civilized area is cause for fear and alarm, for they kill humans, sometimes stalking a particular individual, sometimes haunting a specific location such as a crossroads in search of victims. Mothmeres are humanoid in shape, but with great, membranous wings, dark blue-grey skin, and eyes that glow with a faint reddish hue. They have no arms. A mothmere is generally seven feet or so in height, but can be as large as ten feet tall. Mothmeres are most commonly found in the ethereal plane, which may be their natural habitat. They can move into the ethereal plane once per round, becoming immune to any material damage and to all spells other than those with a mental effect. Mothmeres frequently use this ability to enter closed rooms and dismember the inhabitants. A mothmere’s faintly glowing eyes cause fear within 30ft, causing any creature of fewer than 4HD to make a saving throw or flee for 3d12 rounds. Mothmeres can carry 300 lbs. weight while flying, and often pick their victims up to drop from great heights. They also have the ability to control fire at will, as per the pyrotechnics spell. It is unknown why these creatures attack (never eating their prey) or why they seem to haunt areas for periods of time and then suddenly leave. Some claim to have been haunted by these creatures for weeks before being found dead or simply never seen again.  Mothmeres typically make temporary lairs in old ruined buildings, hidden caves or mines, or in trees, using them as places to rest during the day and to store trophies from their kills. (Contributed by M. Ahmed).
Mothmere: HD 8; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 foot-talons (1d6); Move 6 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Telepathy, mimicry, pyrotechnics, ethereal travel, +1 or better weapon required to hit, magic resistance 30%.

MUMMY
Mummies cannot be hit by normal weapons, and even magical weapons inflict only half damage against them.  Their touch also inflicts a rotting disease, which prevents magical healing and causes wounds to heal at one-tenth of the normal rate.  A cure disease spell can increase healing rate to half normal, but a remove curse spell is required to completely lift the mummy’s curse.  Mummified kings, pharaohs, priests, or sorcerers might be considerably more powerful than the mummy described here.
Mummy: HD 6+4; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 fist (1d12); Move 6; Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Rot, hit only by magic weapons.

MUSHROOM-MAN
Standing 4ft in height, mushroom-men resemble humanoid mushrooms endowed with both arms and legs. Mushroom-men are usually found in natural caves, caverns, and underground passages.
Mushroom-men are initially created by magic. Once given life through magic they reproduce by way of spores. When a mushroom-man dies (0 hit points or less) it releases 1d6 spores which rapidly (within 1d4 rounds) grow into mushroom-men of 1 HD lower than the parent (1 HD mushroom-men do not produce spores upon death). The spores have 2 hit points (before becoming fully formed mushroom-men).  (Contributed by Skathros).
Mushroom-Men: HD 3, 2, or 1; AC 5[14]; Atk Fist (1d6) or weapon; Move 12; Save 14, 16, or 17; CL/XP 5, 3, or 1/240, 60, or 15; Special: Spores.

NAGAS “Naga” is the Sanskrit word for dragon or snake.  In mythology, the naga are benevolent and very powerful, equivalent to Asian dragons. The nagas portrayed here are more serpentine and less powerful; all have the body of a snake, although the head is not necessarily that of a serpent.  All kinds of interesting abilities could be added to “customized” nagas, from breathing fire to moving in and out of strange planes of existence.

NAGA, GUARDIAN
The largest and noblest of the naga, guardian nagas are from 20 to 25ft in length.  They do not necessarily have a humanlike head, but some characteristic (a flowing mane of hair, for instance) will immediately set their appearance apart from normal serpents.  They can bite or spit with lethal poison, and if they hit with their coils they automatically cause 1d8 points of constriction damage per round thereafter.  Guardian nagas cast clerical spells (2/2/1/1).  A sample selection of spells for a guardian naga might include: level 1: Cure Light Wounds x2; level 2: Hold Person, Silence 15ft radius; level 3: Cure Disease; level 4: Cure Serious Wounds.
Naga, Guardian : HD 11; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 bite (1d6 + poison), 1 constrict (1d8), 1 spit (poison); Move 18; Save 4; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Poison, constriction, spells.

NAGA, HANU-
Hanu-nagas are a predominantly tropical and subtropical form of naga, less magical than the human-headed variety. Rather than a human-headed giant snake, hanu-nagas have a feral monkey head upon a great serpentine body. These nagas lair in jungles and rainforests, haunting forgotten temples and ancient ruins, where many are worshipped by tribes of wild monkeys and/or apes. The most intelligent of hanu-nagas may have followings of tribesmen or cavemen. The stylized, writhing dance of a hanu-naga allows it to exert a mystic control over apes and monkeys within a radius of 300ft. These controlled creatures will act at the naga’s mental command. It is not necessary for the apes to actually see the naga’s dance to fall under its control; indeed, when a hanu-naga begins its dance, simian creatures within one mile (to a maximum of 20 apes) will immediately begin moving at top speed to the dancing naga’s presence. The naga may dance and attack at the same time. The bite of a hanu-naga is poisonous, and if the naga hits with its constricting attack it will inflict automatic damage of 1d6 per round until killed. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Naga, Hanu (5HD): HD 5; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d8 + poison) and 1 constrict (1d6); Move 12 (In treetops 9); Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Monkey-summoning dance, poison bite, control simians.
Naga, Hanu (6HD): HD 5; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d8 + poison) and 1 constrict (1d6); Move 12 (In treetops 9); Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Monkey-summoning dance, poison bite, control simians.

NAGA, SPIRIT
Spirit nagas are malicious, evil creatures.  Their gaze has the effect of a charm person spell, their bite is poison, and they cast both magic user spells (4/2/1) and cleric spells (2/1).  A sample spell selection for a spirit naga might be: Magic-user spells level 1: Charm Person x2, Magic Missile, Sleep; level 2: Mirror Image, Web; level 3: Protection from Normal Missiles.  Cleric spells level 1: Cure Light Wounds x2; level 2: Silence 15ft Radius.  Such nagas are from 10 to 20ft in length, and have a human head.
Naga, Spirit: HD 9; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d3 + poison); Move 12; Save 6; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Poison, charm gaze, spells.

NAGA, WATER
Water nagas might be of any alignment.  They do not ordinarily have human heads, but like the guardian nagas they will have some physical attributes separating them clearly from normal serpents.  In the case of water nagas, this might be the color of the scales or the presence of flowing beard-like fins, perhaps.  Water nagas are from 10 to 15ft long.  Water nagas cast magic-user spells (4/2/1).  A sample spell selection for a water naga might be: level 1: Charm Person x2, Magic Missile, Sleep; level 2: Mirror Image, Web; level 3: Protection from Normal Missiles.
Naga, Water: HD 7; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d4 + poison); Move 12 (Swim 20); Save 9; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Poison, spells.

NEMORPHIC TWIN
A Nemorphis is a non-corporeal entity that absorbs stray memories and thoughts; they are sometimes attracted toward the sudden reassemblance of memories that takes place when a person is raised from the dead. Once a Nemorphis forms a psychic link to its victim (saving throw negates), it drains an experience level per day, using absorbed memories and feelings to become a ghostly duplicate of its victim, a so-called Nemorphic Twin. During the days when the victim is being drained of life energy, he frequently becomes lost in wistful reveries of past times, alternating with vivid nightmares.
Once the victim descends to 1st Level, the Twin becomes corporeal, usually resembling a more youthful version of the victim. The Nemorphic Twin will track the person down the next day and attempt to slay him, having the same stats, skills and spells possessed by the weakened twin. Whichever combatant is victorious "inherits" the drained experience levels, in a rush of sensations that has a 1 in 4 chance of sending the victor into a coma lasting 1d6 hours. If defeated, a Nemorphic Twin disappears, leaving no trace of its short existence. If the Nemorphic Twin wins, it will be drawn to the places and people it "remembers." People interacting with the Nemorphic Twin will find it "wrong" in many ways, for it is still mentally inhuman, whatever its guise. (Contributed by Sean Wills, aka "Geordie Racer").
Neomorphic Twin: stats depend on circumstances.

NIGHT HAG
Night hags come from beyond the material plane: perhaps from the realms of dream, perhaps from the demonic pits of the underworlds.  These creatures prey upon the souls of those who are evil/chaotic: they can cause enchanted sleep once against such individuals (saving throw, affects up to 12th level), or visit the victim’s dreams nightly (no saving throw) to leech away a point of constitution per night until the attribute reaches 0 and the hag can steal away the soul.  In combat, night hags can magically weaken an opponent to half normal strength (saving throw) three times per day; additionally, they can use a spell that automatically inflicts 2d8 points of damage against a single opponent.  Both of these abilities have a range of 100ft.  A hag can also also become ethereal and incorporeal at will, summon a demon ally once per day (with only a 50% chance of success), and cannot be hit by weapons with a magical bonus of +2 or less.  They are highly resistant to magic, as well.
Hag, Night: HD 8; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 10; Save 8; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Magic resistance (65%), +2 or better magic weapon to hit, magical abilities.

NIGHTMARE
Nightmares are the steeds of night hags and other demons; black horses with flaming hoofs and mane.  Their breath is a cloud of brimstone smoke, which causes any nearby opponent to attack at –2 (saving throw).  These horrible creatures can become incorporeal and travel between the planes of existence bearing their evil/chaotic riders.
Nightmare: HD 7; AC –4[23]; Atk 1 bite (1d8), 2 hoofs (2d6); Move 18 (Fly 35); Save 9; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Breathe smoke, become incorporeal.

NIXIE
Nixies are weak water fey creatures.  One in ten of them has the power to cast a powerful charm person (-2 on saving throw) that causes the victim to walk into the water and join the nixies as their slave (1 year).  Casting dispel magic against the curse has only a 75% chance of success, and once the victim is actually in the water the chance drops to 25%.  Nixies are ordinarily friendly, but they are capricious.
Nixie: HD 1d4hp; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 6 (Swim 12); Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Charm.

NYKOUL
Nykoul are undead hill giant shamans, driven to continue plaguing the world by dark powers from beyond this world. In addition to being able to cast spells as a 5th level Cleric, Nykoul possess a disorienting gaze attack (as the spell Confusion) that they may use twice per day. One in three Nykoul commands an army of 1-12 Giant Rats. (Contributed by Andrew Trent, "the Venomous Pao").
Nykoul: HD 9; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 Weapon (2d12); Move 9; Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Spells, Undead Immunities, Confusion.

NYMPH
Nymphs inhabit the wild and untrammeled places of the earth, spots of beauty and calm.  Anyone seeing a nymph naked must make a saving throw or die (or sometimes be transformed into an animal).   Even looking upon a nymph causes permanent blindness (saving throw).  Nymphs are not powerful in and of themselves, but harming a nymph almost always brings down vengeance of some sort from the gods.
Nymph: HD 3; AC 9[10]; Atk none; Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Sight causes blindness or death.

OBLIVION WRAITH
An oblivion wraith appears very much like a wraith, and shares the same immunity to non-magic weapons and cold, but it is not actually undead, being a creature of the void rather than undeath. An oblivion wraith's touch shreds the raw existence of the creature hit, dealing 3d6 points of damage and also permanently draining one point from the target's highest attribute for every natural 5 or 6 rolled on the damage dice. For example, a damage roll of 6, 3, and 5 on 3d6 deals 14 damage and drains 2 points from the target's highest attribute. In addition, if a creature brings any nonliving object (such as a swung weapon) into contact with an oblivion wraith, the object is irrevocably disintegrated (magical objects receive a saving throw). Oddly, oblivion wraiths are unable to actively disintegrate objects by touching them. (Contributed by Guy Fullerton).
Oblivion Wraith: HD 12; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 touch (3d6 + attribute drain); Move 15 (Fly 30); Save 3; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: Drain attributes, immune to non-magical weapons, disintegrates objects.

OCHRE JELLY
Ochre jellies are amorphous oozes that damage opponents with their acidic surface.  They dissolve any adventurers they kill, making a raise dead spell impossible.
Ochre Jelly: HD 6; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 acid-laden strike (3d4); Move 3; Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Lightning divides creature.

OCTOPUS, GIANT
After a giant octopus hits with a tentacle, it does 1d6 points of damage per round, automatically, instead of the initial 1d3.  Also, there is a 25% chance that the tentacle “hit” pinions one of the victim’s limbs (roll randomly for left/right arms and legs to see which is immobilized).
Giant Octopus: HD 7; AC 7[12]; Atk 8 tentacles (1d3); Move 2 (Swim 10); Save 9; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: constriction and pinioning.

OCULAKTIS
These spherical monstrosities are essentially gigantic eyeballs that drift through space in some of the more bizarre dimensions of existence. They are used as floating mounts by beings wild and weird. They may transmit their superhuman visual information to riders if desired, as well as make terrifying gaze attacks once per combat round. The concentrated gaze of an oculaktis actually transmits a powerful beam that can cause magnificent explosions, incinerate solid stone, or melt men to puddles of steaming jelly. The heat beam has a range of 100ft and the first time it is used it inflicts 6d6 points of damage (saving throw for half damage) to its target. Thereafter, unless the oculaktis has an hour or more to "recharge," the beam only inflicts 3d6 points of damage (save for half). The oculaktis must make a successful to-hit roll with the heat beam. (Contributed by Random).
Oculaktis: HD 7; AC 5[14]; Atk Gaze (6d6 or 3d6); Move (Fly 15); Save 11; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Heat ray (save for half damage).

OGRE
Ogres are normally quite stupid, but more intelligent versions might be encountered here and there.  Many folkloric ogres are portrayed as shape-shifters, and some have inherent magical powers – the ogre mage is one example of this sort of ogre.  In general, even ogres with magical powers aren’t very smart (unlike the highly intelligent ogre mage).
Ogre: HD 4+1; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d10+1); Move 9; Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

OGRE, SWAMP
Swamp Ogres are larger, semi-aquatic cousins of standard ogres. They range in color from moldy green to burnt yellowish-brown, and they have huge heads that protrude forward from their enormous, hunched shoulders. Their great arms are able to rotate around completely, allowing them to easily reach anywhere on their backs and shoulders. Swamp Ogres are often covered in moss, swamp grass, and mud, which facilitates their favorite mode of attack: Surprise. Swamp Ogres sit or lie down in the muck (depending on depth) so that just their great shoulder hump protrudes above the mire; when still, they need to breathe only once each hour. While in this position, a Swamp Ogre waits until someone or something sets foot upon its shoulders, whereupon its arms move with lightning speed to grab its victim and pull it down into the mire to be eaten. If the Swamp Ogre hits with both hands, it drags the opponent completely below the mire to drown in 4-6 rounds. If the Swamp Ogre hits with only one hand, it drags the opponent under on the following round, unless 8 points of damage is dealt to its hand or it is otherwise forced it to loosen its grip. Once its opponent is underneath the mire, the Swamp Ogre uses its conventional claw and bite attacks on the unfortunate victim. If a Swamp Ogre scores a natural 20 with its bite attack against a man-size or smaller opponent, it swallows that opponent whole. A swallowed opponent suffers 1d8 damage each round from stomach acid, can't attack with anything larger than a dagger, and ultimately suffocates in 2d4 rounds. (Contributed by Sean Stone).
Ogre, Swamp : AC 4(15); HD 6+1; Atk 2 grabs (submerge opponent), or 2 claws (1d6 each) and bite (2d6); Move 6 (Swim 12); Save 11; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Surprise opponents on a 1-5 when hiding in swamp, and swallow whole with bite on a natural 20.

OGRE, TUSKEN
Tusken ogres are a race of ogres mid-way between the normal, feral ogre and the magically potent ogre mage. These ogres have a only a pale bluish tint to their skin, and powerful tusks protruding from their mouths. They are somewhat more intelligent than normal ogres, and are often found in the service of an ogre mage. Tusken ogres that are not minions of an ogre mage, encountered in the wild, often inhabit crude but human-like residences. They dress in silk garments taken from victims or merchants, and usually fight with polearms or outsized swords. They are inveterate slavers, and their lairs will often contain human prisoners, especially women. A tusken ogre has one magical ability, which is to create a single mirror image of itself at the beginning of a battle. As with the spell mirror image, the illusory double will disappear when it is hit. Female tusken ogres are encountered only rarely. Asian and European varieties of the tusken ogre are actually quite similar, although the European type would likely not be dressed in silk but in whatever finery might be available. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Ogre, Tusken: HD 5; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 weapon (1d10+1); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Single mirror image.

OGRE MAGE
The ogre mage is an ogre with magic powers, based on Japanese legend.  An ogre mage can fly, turn invisible (per the spell), create a 10ft radius circle of magical darkness, change into human form, cast sleep and charm person once per day, and cast a cone of frost with a range of 60ft to a base of 30ft, causing 8d6 damage to any caught within (saving throw applies).  Western folklore also contains many examples of shape-shifting, magical ogres (the most famous example being the one in Puss-in-Boots), so there might be many different interpretations of magical ogres whether or not they are called “ogre mage.”
Ogre Mage: HD 5+4; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 weapon (1d12); Move 12 (Fly 18); Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Magic use.

OKTOMON
Oktomon appear rather like man-sized octopui, but they are actually clever tool and weapon-using "humanoids." They generally live underwater, either fresh or salt, but are fully amphibious and can breathe on land as well as underwater. Oktomon walk on 4 of their eight legs and use the other 4 as arms. In combat, Oktomon use various combinations of four weapons and shields. They do not typically use pulled bows, but may occasionally make use of crossbows. Due to their wide-set eyes and multiple arms, it is virtually impossible to flank an Oktomon or successfully attack one "from behind." Oktomon are attracted to shiny objects and often carry a number of items of jewelry with them as prized possessions. Oktomon are renowned for their mechanical abilities, and an Oktomon lair is typically a very dangerously trapped location. Tales of magic-using Oktomon are often told, but have yet to be verified. Depending on the source, it is also reported that Oktomon are either outright hostile towards or firmly allied with Sea Hags. It is possible, of course, that different groups of Oktomon may have different allegiances. (Contributed by Andrew Trent).
Oktomon: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk Up to 4 weapons (damage by weapon type); Move 12 (Swim 18); Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

OLD CRAWLER
An "old crawler" is a withered human hand severed at the wrist, black and mummified in appearance. Many think they may originate from the leftovers of a lich. Old crawlers attack by sneaking up on a character and grabbing his or her foot; or they drop from a higher place onto the head, face or shoulder of the poor adventurer. The grip of an old crawler can only be broken with a roll of 1 on a d4 (1-2 if the character has magical or special strength). Any area squeezed by an old crawler is subject to gangrenous rotting, and continues to incur damage until the grip is broken. Once latched on, the old crawler remains so until destroyed or pried lose. Some old crawlers have magical rings that can still cast attacks. While fire would be the most obvious harm to the hand, it poses quite a threat if attached to a victim. Bashing attacks are the most effective. The old crawler can "flee" with a scrambling move when needed at double it's normal crawling rate.  Note that Old crawlers are extremely resistant to many attacks due to magically improved saving throws left over from their strange origins (included in stats). (Contributed by Old Crawler).
Old Crawler: HD 2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 rotting grip (1d8); Move 6 (Scramble 12); Save 11; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Possible spell casting, good saving throws, continuous damage.

OMGOTH
Omgoths were once holy men who, through betrayal of their faith, now suffer from a curse that has given them a rotting, ghoulish appearance. They look so much like a ghoul that they are often mistaken as one. Their bodies are in always in a continuous state of decay and they must regularly feed on the living to replenish their lost flesh or the curse with consume them. Omgoths exude an aura of corruption that causes healing magics employed in their presence to damage the intended recipient instead of healing; be they from spells, potions or magical items. Though they may be found in the company of undead, they are not themselves undead and cannot be turned. (Contributed by The Lizard of Oz).
Omgoth: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d6); Move 9; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Corruption.

OPHIDIAN
Ophidians are an ancient race of snake-beings, with scaly human arms and a somewhat human-looking head.  They are denizens of hot climates, deserts and jungles both, often found in forgotten cities or temples from the days when their race held greater sway in the world.  Anyone bitten by an ophidian and failing a saving throw will, within 1d4 weeks, produce ophidian children and die in the process.  It is in this manner that ophidians reproduce; they are otherwise asexual.  The deadly “pregnancy” can be ended by a cure disease spell or similar magics.  Lesser, or “sterile,” ophidians (a non-breeding caste) are sometimes found – these have no effective bite.
Ophidian: HD3; AC 4[15] or 3[16] with shield; Atk1 two-handed weapon (1d8+1) or weapon with shield (1d8), and bite (0); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Reproductive bite.
Sterile (Lesser) Ophidian: HD3; AC 4[15] or 3[16] with shield; Atk1 two-handed weapon (1d8+1) or weapon with shield (1d8); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

ORC
Orcs are stupid, brutish humanoids that gather in tribes of hundreds.  Most are subterranean dwellers, and fight with a penalty of –1 in sunlight.  Occasionally, war-bands or even entire tribes of orcs issue forth from their caverns to raid and pillage by night.  Orcish leaders are great brutes with additional hit dice, and magic-using shamans may also be found in the larger tribes.  Orcish tribes hate each other, and will fight savagely unless restrained by a powerful and feared commander, such as an evil high priest or a sorcerer.
Orc: HD 1; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 by weapon, usually spear (1d6) or scimitar (1d8); Move 9; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

ORIGAMI WARRIOR
The origami warrior is a creation made of intricately folded paper, in the shape of a full sized human warrior. They move with lightning speed (accounting for the armor class), and blunt weapons inflict only half damage against them. Piercing weapons pass through the paper construction without causing any damage at all, but cutting weapons inflict +1 damage and fire inflicts double damage. Origami warriors wield normal spears. They are generally found in the service of powerful sorcerers, and have magic resistance of 10%. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Origami Warrior: HD 2; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 spear (1d6); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Magic resistance 10%, half damage from blunt weapons, immune to piercing weapons, +1 damage from cutting weapons, double damage from fire.

OSTRICH, GIANT
Giant ostriches are large enough to be ridden as mounts, and might be for sale in exotic lands or large cities.
Giant Ostrich: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 18; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

OTYUGH
Otyughs live underground, hiding in piles of refuse, for they are scavengers.  These bizarre creatures are slightly larger than a human, a mass of flesh mounted on three squat, elephant-like legs.  The otyugh has a sensory-organ stalk, and two rough, bone-ridged tentacles used for attacking enemies.  Anyone bitten by an otyugh’s mouth has a 90% chance of contracting a fatal disease (death in 3d6 days unless cured).  Although they are relatively stupid, otyughs use rudimentary telepathy to communicate with each other (and other telepathic beings, if they are encountered).
Otyugh: HD 7; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 tentacles (1d8), bite (1d4+1); Move 6; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Disease.

OWLBEAR
Owlbears have the body of a bear, but the beak of an owl (with some feathers on the head and places on the body as well).  On an attack roll of 18+ (natural roll), the owlbear grabs its victim and hugs it for an additional 2d8 points of damage.
Owlbear: HD 5+1; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d6); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: hug for additional 2d8 if to-hit roll is 18+.

OWL, GIANT
Giant owls are wise, but very predatory – many of them consider humans to be acceptable prey.  Their eggs are very valuable on the open market, for if trained from birth, a giant owl can be used as a steed.  In bright sunlight, giant owls fight with a penalty of –2 to their die rolls.
Giant Owl: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (1d6+1); Move 3 (Fly 20); Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Flies silently, -2 to all die rolls in bright light.

PEGASUS
Pegasi are winged horses.  Some might have bat wings, some might be evil; such choices are left to the Game Master.
Pegasus: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 hooves (1d8); Move 24 (Fly 48); Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Flying.

PERYTON
Perytons have the body of a giant eagle, the head of a stag (but with sharp teeth), and cast the shadow of a man.  They eat the hearts of their victims, and lair in high mountain aeries.  Perytons are magical creatures (of medieval folklore), and consequently a magical weapon is required to hit them.
Peryton: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 antlers (2d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Immune to non-magic weapons.

PIERCER
Piercers resemble stalactites, and drop from cavern ceilings to pierce their victims.  After falling (and feeding), they crawl slowly back to the ceiling in order to attack again. Note that the damge inflicted by a piercer is 1d6 per hit die of the creature.
Piercer (1HD): HD 1; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 drop and pierce (1d6); Move 1; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.
Piercer (2HD): HD 2; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 drop and pierce (2d6); Move 1; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.
Piercer (3HD): HD 3; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 drop and pierce (3d6); Move 1; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.
Piercer (4HD): HD 4; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 drop and pierce (4d6); Move 1; Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

PIXIE
Pixies are nasty, treacherous creatures of the fey, resembling tiny, winged people.  They attack with a +4 bonus to hit with arrows.  A pixie speeds each arrow on its way with a charm, which reduces rate of fire to one arrow per round, but enchants the arrow in one of three ways.  A pixie arrow, at the pixie’s choice, (1) is enchanted with a +1 to hit and damage, for 1d4+1 points; (2) causes sleep for 3d6 turns (saving throw); (3) causes total amnesia (saving throw).  Pixies are magic resistant (25%), can polymorph themselves as many times per day as they desire, can become invisible at will, can cast dancing lights at will, can dispel magic once per day, and can cause permanent Confusion once per day with a successful hit (saving throw).
Pixie: HD 1; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 dagger (1d4) or arrow; Move 6 (Fly 15); Save 17; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Arrows, magic resistance (25%), spell-like abilities.

PORTAL CAMEL (Sage Beast)
The Portal Camel is an intelligent and magical creature. It resembles a normal camel, except that it has three humps and two heads. Though not as ill-tempered as actual camels, it does have a high opinion of itself – which it will loudly voice, being capable of speech. While a portal camel can be used as a pack or riding animal, it will demand a higher level of care and pay than any prospective hirelings might seek. As with its normal kin, a portal camel is herbivorous and capable of storing water for extended periods. They can carry 350 pounds without discomfort.
The left head of a portal camel can cast Protection from Evil and Mirror Image each twice per day. The right head of a portal camel can cast Dispel Magic, Haste and Slow each once per day. Three portal camels acting together can cast Dimension Door, although they may bicker and argue about which one will get to use it. The necks of a portal camel are snake-like in their flexibility, allowing it to turn one head back to face a rider – perhaps to nip him on the knee.
Portal camels collect stories and legends of the lands and dimensions through which they travel, and often become sages on obscure topics. Their lips are almost as dextrous as human fingers, allowing them to manipulate simple objects. They may be convinced to join an adventuring party or merchant caravan if someone offers to act as guide and interpreter. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Portal Camel: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 bites (1hp) and 1 kick (1d4); Move 15; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Magical abilities, cooperative dimension door.

PSEUDO-DRAGON
Pseudo-dragons are tiny relatives of dragons or wyverns, less than 2ft long.  Like wyverns, they have a tail stinger: the poison is not lethal in 75% of cases, but it induces catalepsy for 1d4 days (saving throw).  When they desire, pseudo-dragons can become almost invisible (80% chance not to be seen).  They are somewhat resistant to magic (25%), and this resistance extends to any human touching the creature (if the pseudo-dragon desires).
Pseudo-dragon: HD 2; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 bite (1d3), 1 tail sting (1d3 + poison); Move 6 (Fly 25); Save 16; CL/XP 5/240; Special: 6 (fly 25).

PURPLE WORM
Purple worms are massive annelids that grow 40ft and more in length, and sometimes exceed ten feet in width.  They are subterranean, chewing tunnels in rock (or through sand, in deserts, where they are a tan color). These beasts swallow their prey whole on a roll 4 higher than the needed number, or if the worm rolls double the number required to hit.  They can swallow anything the size of a horse or smaller.  In addition to the worm’s dreaded bite, it has a poison stinger on its tail, the length of a sword and just as deadly even from the piercing wound it inflicts.  The poison injected by the stinger is lethal if the victim fails a saving throw.  What prey the purple worms once hunted (or perhaps still do, in deep places) with such natural weapons must have been terrifying indeed.  Aquatic versions of the purple worm might also exist…
Purple Worm: HD 15; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (2d12), 1 sting (1d8 + poison); Move 9; Save 3; CL/XP 17/3500; Special: Poison sting, swallow whole.

RAGGED CRAW
Ragged Craw are wingless, intelligent bird-people with beaks and clawed hands, who shroud themselves in tattered cowled robes. They tend to be nomadic, often travelling in small groups (1d6+6) in covered wagons. Ragged Craw are fond of carousing and many (1in 10) have alcohol problems, quickly becoming morose and violent. These creatures are inherently magical and have the power to detect and dispel magic. The regurgitated food of a Ragged Craw often possesses healing properties when applied as a paste over open wounds (4 in 6 chance of healing 1d4 HP over a day). Ragged Craw have gained notoriety as slavers, gamblers, thieves and wastrels. (Contributed by Sean Wills).
Ragged Craw: HD 3; AC 9[10]; Atk 2 claws (1d4) and beak (1d3) or sleeping darts (1d2, roll Saving Throw or sleep for 1d6 rounds); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Detect Magic, Dispel Magic (as 4th Level Magic User).

RAKSHASA
Rakshasas are evil spirits from Indian mythology.  Their true form is that of a demon with the head of a tiger or other predatory animal, but by magical illusion they always appear to others in a friendly or non-threatening form.  Rakshasas can only be affected by the most powerful of spells (level 8 or 9), and they can only be hit with magical weapons.  Crossbow bolts that have been blessed by a cleric are the bane of the rakshasa – such bolts are treated as +3 weapons against them.  Rakshasas are minor spell casters, able to cast magic user spells (3/2/1) and cleric spells (1 level 1 spell). (The rakshasa episode of “Kolchak the Night Stalker” is obviously the source of this interpretation of the rakshasa).
Typical spells for a rakshasa:
Magic user level 1: Magic Missile x3; level 2: Mirror Image, Web; level 3: Fly
Cleric level 1: Cure Light Wounds
Rakshasa: HD 7; AC –4[23]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d6); Move 15; Save 9; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Illusory appearance, special magic resistance, spells

RANINE
Ranine are degenerate, subterranean creatures who serve the foul frog-demon Tsathoggua. Like their master, the Ranine are of broadly batrachian appearance but possess small bat-like ears in addition to vicious fangs and, in many cases, small horns. They are drawn to underground locations suffused with Chaotic energies, so many also possess chaotic traits of both the major and minor varieties.
Ranine shy away from sunlight and suffer a -1 penalty to their attack rolls and saving throws when they operate aboveground. If given sufficient room in combat, these creatures can hop at enemies, which gives them a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls. When fighting at close quarters, they try to bite opponents in order to inject them with a paralyzing poison. Failure to save against it results in paralysis for 3D6 turns. Ranine in groups larger than six typically include a leader, who can cast clerical spells as if it were a cleric of the same level as his hit dice.
Precisely how the Ranine reproduce is a mystery, as they appear to be completely asexual. Given that these beings prefer to take opponents prisoner rather than slay them outright, some sages have postulated that the Ranine somehow "convert" their prey into new frog-men to swell their ranks. If true, these creatures pose an even more terrible threat to civilization than is commonly supposed. (Contributed by James Maliszewski).
Ranine: HD 2; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d6) and 1 bite (1d4), or 1 weapon (1d8); Move 9 (Swim 12); Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Breathe Water, Hop, Paralyzing Bite

RATLING
Standing no taller than 4ft tall, ratlings, as their name implies, resemble humanoid rodents. Although not much of a threat individually, ratlings tend to attack in packs (of 4d6). Ratlings dealing damage via a bite may infect their victims with the same disease that mundane rats do. The chances of passing on the disease are identical to that of their giant-rat kin. (Contributed by Skathros).
Ratling: HD 1; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+poison) or weapon; Save 17; Move 12; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Diseased bite.

RAT, GIANT
Giant rats are often found in dungeons, and are about the size of a cat, or perhaps a lynx.  Monstrously huge rats are vicious predators the size of a wolf.  The bite of some (1 in 20) giant rats – of both sizes – causes disease.  A saving throw is allowed (versus poison).  The effects of the disease are decided by the GM.
Rat, Giant: HD 1d4hp; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d3); Move 12; Save 18; CL/XP A/5; Special: 5% are diseased.
Rat, Huge: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 3/120; Special: 5% are diseased.

RAT, (GIANT DESONGNOL RAT)
The Desongnol rat in its larger form, about the size of a cat, is feared by both farmer, woodsman and adventurer. It has a rather large nose and an extremely nasty temper and bite. When attacking, the Desongnol rat uses its venom to sicken its prey and then tears at it with its powerful claws to allow the rat to feed. It has been said to give off pig-like noises and to have a particular stench when in large numbers. These rats are usually found lurking near farms and settlements where food is easy to forage. It is known for constructing complex tunnel systems large enough for a small human/demi-human (halfling sized or smaller) to enter. (Contributed by Chgowiz).
Rat, Desongnol: HD 1d4hp; AC 7 [12], Atk 1 bite (1d2) and 2 claws (1d3); Move 12; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Non-lethal poison +2 to save, effects are up to the referee.

RAT, WIZARD'S LAB
Wizard's lab rats are giant rats that have been subjected to any number of strange scientific or magical experiments, and have acquired one of a variety of permanent conditions. To determine the condition of a given lab rat, roll once on the magical potion table, with the lab rat gaining the indicated effect as a permanent ability. Ignore poison potions (these rats would have died in the laboratory) and note that a healing potion indicates a number of hit points regenerated per turn. A character bitten by a lab rat has a 5% chance to gain the lab rat's condition for 1d6+1 turns. Any particular lab rat has a 20% chance of possessing human-like intelligence. (Contributed by Random).
Rat, Lab: HD 1; AC 7 [12]; Atk Bite (1d4); Move: 12; Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Magical effects.

RAVEN, GIANT
Intelligent and malign, giant ravens are almost as large as a man.  They are ideal servants and scouts for powerful evil sorcerers and other such overlords.
Giant Raven: HD 3; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d8); Move 2 (Fly 20); Save 14; CL/XP 4/240; Special: None.

RAY, GIANT MANTA
Giant manta rays are large enough to swallow most opponents whole (anything smaller than a giant), which they will do if they exceed their needed to-hit number by 3 or more.  Anyone swallowed will die in 6 rounds unless the manta is slain (the victim can fight from the inside).  A hit by the tail spine stuns the victim for 1d8 rounds (saving throw).  Some claim that there is a highly intelligent and evil variety of giant manta rays in the deeper seas.
Giant Manta Ray: HD 8; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (2d6), tail sting (2d10); Move (Swim 18); Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Swallow whole, tail stuns.

RAY, STING
Sting rays are very difficult to see on the ocean floor.  They have a poison sting which they use to defend themselves when danger comes near.  Sting ray poison causes paralysis (3d6 turns) and also inflicts 3d6 points of damage. A successful saving throw avoids all effects from the poison.
Sting Ray: HD 1d6hp; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 sting (1d3 + poison); Move (Swim 10); Save 17; CL/XP 3/60; Special: non-lethal poison.

RAZOR WING
Razor Wings get their name from their razor sharp wings, which they use to bring down potential prey. Razor Wings resemble large crows with shinning steel-like feathers tipping their wings. They attack in groups, swarming over prey from above. Razor Wings will swoop down from above with such swiftness that anyone acting after the Razor Wings initiative is unable to engage it in hand-to-hand combat. (Contributed by Skathros).
Razor Wings: HD 1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 beak (1d4), claw (1d4), or razor wing (1d6); Move 9 (Fly 12); Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Swoop attack.

RECURSER
Recursers are intelligent entities from the Plane of Entropy. They are never encountered randomly, but are drawn to the material world by those who try to alter space or time through the use of magic. Recursers appear as shimmering spheres of black electrity, which seem to absorb light rather than emit it. When a recurser appears, it will begin moving towards the one responsible for its appearance immediately, and cannot be diverted. Recursers attack their victims by absorbing them with an entropic touch, which passes through armor or any magical protection as if the target was completely unprotected (AC 9[10]). Recursers can only be hit by magical weapons with a bonus of +1 or better. These creatures - or manifestations - are essentially mindless, and exist purely to destroy anyone or anything that attempts to alter the course of fate. They do not bargain, nor will they surrender. The sight of a recurser is terrifying, and anyone who observes one must make a saving throw or be paralyzed by fear for 1d3 rounds. Recursers do not need food or sleep, and will track the object of their attention tirelessly until they are successful or defeated. There can never be more than one recurser on the Material Plane at any time. (Contributed by Russell Cone, "Grim").
Recurser: HD 5+10; AC 1[18]; Atk Entropic Touch 3d6; Move (Levitate 10); Save 8; CL/XP 7/250; Special: Entropic touch, causes fear, immune to non-magical weapons.

REEF WALKER
Reef walkers are a cluster of anemones with a rudimentary intelligence, shaped into a large bipedal "body" covered all over in the stinging tentacles characteristic of anemones. They walk slowly through coral reefs, stopping often to flatten out into a less threatening shape and wait for schools of fish to approach. Their random meanderings sometimes take them onto land, where they can survive for up to two hours or so, and they continue hunting along the coastline before returning to their reefs. If a reef walker should stumble upon a coastal village, it may return several times to find more prey, for a village full of humans is an excellent hunting ground. If a reef walker hits an opponent, its stinging tentacles inject a paralytic poison (-3 save). (Contributed by Thomas Clark Finch).
Reef Walker: HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 arm (1d6+paralysis); Move 9; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: paralyze prey.

REMORHAZ
Remorhaz live in arctic regions, burrowing tunnels into the snow and ice.  They resemble massive centipedes (30ft long), with fan-like rudimentary wings.  They generate intense internal heat.  Remorhaz with 10 or more hit dice can swallow man-sized prey whole (natural 20 required), and the monster’s internal temperature instantly kills anyone swallowed.  The top of a remorhaz glows red with heat, and will melt non-magical weapons (also dealing tremendous damage to anyone touching it.
Remorhaz (8HD): HD 8; AC 0[19], head/underside 2 [17]; Atk 1 bite (5d6); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: swallow whole on natural 20, melt weapons.
Remorhaz (9HD): HD 9; AC 0[19], head/underside 2 [17]; Atk 1 bite (5d6); Move 12; Save 6; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: swallow whole on natural 20, melt weapons.
Remorhaz (10HD): HD 10; AC 0[19], head/underside 2 [17]; Atk 1 bite (5d6); Move 12; Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: swallow whole on natural 20, melt weapons.
Remorhaz (11HD): HD 11; AC 0[19], head/underside 2 [17]; Atk 1 bite (5d6); Move 12; Save 4; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: swallow whole on natural 20, melt weapons.
Remorhaz (12HD): HD 12; AC 0[19], head/underside 2 [17]; Atk 1 bite (5d6); Move 12; Save 3; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: swallow whole on natural 20, melt weapons.
Remorhaz (13HD): HD 13; AC 0[19], head/underside 2 [17]; Atk 1 bite (5d6); Move 12; Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: swallow whole on natural 20, melt weapons.

RETRIEVER
Retrievers are massive (20ft tall) spider-mechanisms built of metal.  Some claim that these infernal devices are actually built in the hells and underworlds, which is not certain, but the malign intelligence built into them is unquestionably evil and destructive.  Every third round, the retriever can shoot a magical ray from its eyes, having one of four effects: fire, cold, or electricity (4d6 hit points, save for half), or flesh-to-stone (save applies).  No to-hit roll is required for the rays, but the particular effect each time is random.  If one of the retriever’s claws hits on a natural roll of 20, it holds the victim and crushes for automatic damage in future rounds.
Retriever: HD 10; AC –1[20]; Atk 4 claws (1d8), eye-ray; Move 9; Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Eye rays, crushing damage on natural 20.

RHINOCEROS
Rhinoceros are aggressive and stupid.  They inflict double damage when charging.
Rhinoceros: HD 8; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 horn (2d6); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Double damage on charge.

RHINOCEROS, WOOLY
Wooly rhinoceros are Pleistocene beasts, common during the ice ages.  They have extremely long horns and a shaggy coat of hair.
Wooly Rhinoceros: HD 10; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 horn (2d6); Move 12; Save 5; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Double damage on charge.

ROCK WEASEL, GIANT
Rock Weasels are Giant Weasels that have come into contact with potent transmutative magic, becoming attuned to the elemental earths. This magical attunement manifests itself in the form of a breath attack; rock weasels can spit forth a 10ft long cone of rock shards and pebbles, inflicting 8 hit points of damage to all within this area (save negates). Rock Weasels emit low, grumbling vocalizations reminiscent of stone grinding against stone, and their eyes are black as coal. Their earthy nature makes them slower than normal Giant Weasels, but sturdier opponents in close combat. (Contributed by Andrew Trent).
Rock Weasel: HD 4; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 9; Save 13; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Stone Breath

ROC
Rocs are the mythological great birds of legend, large enough to prey upon elephants.  They can be trained as fledglings to serve as steeds, so roc eggs or fledglings would be a prize indeed, worth great sums of gold.  Rocs might grow as large as 18HD, with commensurately increased statistics.
Roc: HD 12; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (3d12), 2 claws (3d6); Move 3 (Fly 30); Save 3; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: None.

ROPER
Ropers are shapeless but extremely tough-skinned organisms, with about the body mass of a hill giant.  They look very much like stone, and can shape themselves to resemble a natural pillar, stalagmite, lump, or any other simple rock formation.  To attack, the roper hurls out long tendrils with a range of 50ft (one per round); the roper can use as many as six of these tentacles at a time.  If the tentacle hits, it grabs the victim and draws him 10ft per round toward the roper’s huge, tooth-filled mouth.  The victim must make a saving throw or lose half his strength points due to the secretions on the tentacle (3d6 turns).  A human has a 1 in 6 chance per round to break the roper’s hold if his strength has been halved, 2 in 6 if his strength remains normal.  Ropers are immune to electricity and take only half damage from cold, but they are susceptible to fire, taking +1 damage per hit die inflicted by fires (e.g., a 6 hit die fireball inflicts +6 damage).
Roper (10HD): HD 10; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 tentacle (weakness), 1 bite (2d10); Move 3; Save 5; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: tentacles grab and cause weakness.
Roper (11HD): HD 11; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 tentacle (weakness), 1 bite (2d10); Move 3; Save 4; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: tentacles grab and cause weakness.
Roper (12HD): HD 12; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 tentacle (weakness), 1 bite (2d10); Move 3; Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: tentacles grab and cause weakness.

ROT GRUB
Rot grubs are sometimes found, as one might expect from the name, anywhere flesh is left to rot.  They are horrid things about an inch long, but they are quite dangerous – any flesh touching them is at great risk, for they bite in and burrow deeply (rolling to hit).  For a period of 1d3 turns, rot grubs can be killed by burning (1d6 points of damage will be inflicted per rot grub).  Casting Cure Disease will kill all the rot grubs in a person’s body.  After the 1d3 turns elapse, however, the grub has burrowed too deeply to be affected by spells or fire, and the victim will die within one more turn.
Rot Grub: HD 1hp; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 burrow; Move 1; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Burrows to heart.

ROTHRAN
Strange ursine humanoids from the plane of darkness, Rothran often inhabit ruins and dungeons where they seek out magical treasures, which draw them as honey draws earthly bears. Rothran show a strong animosity towards arcane spellcasters. So consumed are they by this vicious hostility that they will seek out magic-users in combat whenever possible, even to the extent of leaving themselves vulnerable to other attackers. Rothran are extraordinarily resistant to magic. (Contributed by Andrew Trent, “the Venomous Pao”).
Rothran: HD 5; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (1d10); Move 9; Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Immune to magic weapons, Magic resistance (90%)

ROTTENTAIL
Rottentails are carnivorous, man-sized humanoids with rabbit-like heads (floppy ears etc). The rest of their race, which lives on a distant planet, moon, or plane of existence, exiled huge numbers of their kind who carry a horrible disease endemic to the species -- these are the rottentails. Scabby, smelly and forever drooling, the outcasts have survived the plague that caused their exile, but they pass on a weaker strain of it to anyone with whom they come into close proximity (20ft). Anyone coming this close to a rottentail must make a saving throw: if the saving throw fails, the victim's rate of healing is reduced to half normal for the next 2d6 days, and he suffers from frequent vomiting until the disease has run its course. Most rottentail tribes live below ground, and all have excellent low-light vision. The brutal, warlike culture of this species leads many of the rottentail warrens near human civilization to work as mercenaries or scouts when they are hired, and as bandits when they aren't. Rottentails, perhaps because of their otherworldly origins, are somewhat resistant to magic directed at them, but they are unable to cast spells themselves. These scabbed and obviously diseased creatures are far stronger and more vicious than they might appear at first sight, and they are extremely skilled in combat, being exceptionally adept at sizing up an opponent's skills and fighting style. They tend to fight defensively, without attacking, at the outset of most combats, which causes enemies to attack at a -2 penalty to hit; each combat round spent evaluating an opponent in this way gives the rottentail a cumulative bonus of +1 to hit when he eventually decides to strike. (The bonus is only for the one attack, and cannot be made at more than +3). Rumour has it that rottentails often subdue badly outnumbered opponents, in order to feast upon their still-living flesh back in the rottentails' underground warrens. They also have a strong breeding urge, and those who have established a warren are very territorial. Rottentails who fight for a living tend to favour patchwork leather armour and many wield twin short swords, although swordstaves (a two-handed weapon that allows them to reach into the second rank of an enemy formation) are also popular. (Contributed by Sean Wills).
Rottentail: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 short swords (1d6) or swordstave (1d8+1); Move 14; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Disease, delayed strike, 30% magical resistance.

RUSALKA (Water Witch)
Rusalka are undead maiden-witches that haunt the cold rivers and lakes in which they drowned. In appearance, rusalka first appear to be comely maidens, clad only in fog. Upon close inspection, however, they are cadaverous with disheveled hair and eyes that shine with evil green fire. Anyone who gazes into the rusalka’s eyes must save versus spells or fall under the affect of a charm person spell. The rusalka then leads her charmed individuals under the cold water to drown. Drowning victims will awaken from the charm, but take 2d8 damage first (for the purpose of the Rusalka, drowning inflicts 2d8 points of damage per round). The touch of a rusalka paralyzes for 1–4 turns (saving throw negates). Paralyzed victims are carried down to the monster’s underwater lair to drown. When a drowning victim attempts to escape from the rusalka's clutches, there is a base 50% chance that the victim may reach the surface (and air) each round, reduced by 5% for each point of strength below 16, and increased by 5% for each point of strength over 16. Paralyzed victims obviously have no hope of escape on their own and will soon drown. Magic weapons are needed to strike a rusalka, and they are immune to mind-affecting spells as well as other attacks and magic that do not affect undead. Once per day, a rusalka may create a wall of fog. Rusalkas are turned as wraiths. Females slain by a rusalka will themselves rise as rusalkas the next night, and will serve the rusalka who slew them until that rusalka is herself destroyed. Rusalkas are repulsed by holy symbols and by the herb absinth. (Contributed by John A. Turcotte © 2006).
Rusalka: HD 4+3; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 bite (special); Move 9 (Swim 18); Save 13; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Charm, paralyze, drown victims, immune to non-magic weapons, immune to mind-affecting spells, normal undead immunities, create wall of fog.

RUST MONSTER
These bizarre creatures are about man-size, and look vaguely like an armadillo; they have armored hide, two antennae, and a long tail with a flanged growth at the end.  Rust monsters do not attack people – they turn metal into rust and eat the rust – but they just can’t resist trying to eat delicious foods like swords and plate mail, even if they are being attacked.  A hit from a rust monster’s antennae causes metal to rust into pieces, and the same is true for metal objects striking the rust monster’s body.  Magical metal has a 10% cumulative chance to avoid rusting per +1 bonus of the armor or weapon.
Rust Monster: HD 5; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 antennae (0); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Cause rust.

SAHUAGIN
Sahuagin are fish-men with shark-like teeth.  They live in salt water, sometimes at considerable depths, and raid the surface world for plunder and sport.  These beings are thoroughly chaotic/evil.  Their society is highly organized, and their lairs are often guarded by sharks.  Some sahuagin may have entangling nets used to ensnare opponents.
Sahuagin: HD 2+1; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 12 (Swim 18); Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

SALAMANDER
Salamanders are intelligent creatures of the elemental planes of fire. They have the upper body of a human and the lower body of a snake, and give off tremendous, intense heat.  The very touch of a salamander deals 1d6 hit points of fire damage, and they wrap their tails around foes to cause an additional 2d8 points of crushing damage per round (as the victim also writhes in the deadly heat of the serpentine coils).  The salamander’s human torso is AC 5 [14], and the armored serpent-tail is AC 3 [16].  Salamanders cannot be enslaved in the same manner djinn and efreet might be.
Salamander: HD 7; AC 5 [14] (torso); 3[16] (serpent body); Atk Touch and constrict (2d8 + 1d6 heat), 1 weapon (1d6); Move 9; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Heat, constrict.

SAND SCREAMER (Ferret Snake)
The Sand Screamer is a reptilian ferret-like creature the size of a pony, with a long slender body and sandy scales. They can burrow about under the surface of loose sand, leaving a trail like a desert mole, as fast as they dart about when in the open. Sand screamers feed upon tiny creatures hiding from the hot sun, whether in the sand or up a palm tree, and gain their name from the excited hissing noise they make when bursting from the sands. Sand screamers can be trained as mounts for small desert-dwelling humanoids, but they have unpredictable tempers and selective loyalty. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Sand Screamer: HD 2+2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d8); Move 15 (Burrow 15); Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Sand burrowing.

SATYR
Satyrs are the legendary goat-men of the wilderness, with the legs of a goat, the torso of a man, and horns sprouting from the forehead.  Most carry pipes that can be used to cause charm person, sleep, or fear (in each case, a saving throw applies to all hearing the pipes).  In woodlands or forest, satyrs are almost invisible unless they wish to be seen (90% chance to avoid notice).  Satyrs are well known for their lecherousness, and (to put it delicately) they take great interest in human females.  This race is favored of the god Pan (and perhaps also by the powerful Dionysus), which may be the reason why they are resistant to magic (50%).
Satyr: HD 5; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 18; Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Magic resistance (50%), pipes, concealment.

SEA CAT
Sea cats are aquatic versions of the great cats (lions, leopards, tigers, etc) of the land.  Instead of hind legs, they have the tail of a fish.  Their scales are tough, and give these creatures a good armor class.
Sea Cat: HD 5; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d8); Move 1 (18 Swim); Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: None.

SEA HORSE, GIANT
Giant sea horses can be tamed and ridden as mounts underwater.
Sea Horse, Giant (3HD): HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 0 (Swim 24); Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.
Sea Horse, Giant (4HD): HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 0 (Swim 24); Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

SEA LION
Sea lions resemble huge seals, but are fierce predators with a dangerous bite.  Normally, they feed on penguins and fish.  Giant versions might be twice the size of a normal sea lion.
Sea Lion: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d8); Move 1 (Swim 24); Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

SEA SERPENT
The size and nature of sea serpents is a matter for the GM to determine.  The sea serpent depicted here would be about middle size, about sixty feet in length, with smaller ones being half that size (with adjusted statistics, of course), and large ones being about 50% larger than the one described here.  A sea serpent would undoubtedly be capable of swallowing a human whole, probably on a natural attack roll of no more than 14.  A character swallowed whole would be digested within, perhaps, three hours.
Sea Serpent: HD 30; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 bite (4d10); Move 0 (Swim 18); Save 3; CL/XP 30/8400; Special: Swallow whole.

SHADOW MASTIFF
Shadow mastiffs are large dogs (perhaps originating from another plane of existence) with glossy black coats and powerful jaws.  They are hunters of the night, almost invisible in shadowy places (40% likely to disappear from sight after attacking).  In bright light, however, their movement rate is reduced to 9 and they immediately lose 1d6 hit points. The baying of shadow mastiffs causes panic in anyone failing a saving throw, causing anyone affected to drop everything and run for 3d6 turns.
Shadow Mastiff: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+1); Move 18; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Baying, concealment in shadow.

SHADOW
Shadows may or may not be undead creatures: they are immune to sleep and charm, but the GM may decide whether they are undead creatures subject to turning or whether they are some horrible “other” thing, a manifestation perhaps, or a creature from another dimension (or gaps in the dimensions).  Shadows are dark and resemble shadows, though they may be darker.  They are not corporeal, and can only be harmed with magical weapons or by spells.  Their chill touch drains one point of strength with a successful hit, and if a victim is brought to a Strength of 0, he becomes a shadow.  Strength points return after 90 minutes (9 turns).
Shadow: HD 3+3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 touch (1d4 + strength drain); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Drain 1 point str with hit, hit only by magic weapons.

SHAMBLING MOUND
Shambling mounds are moving plants, huge masses of slimy vegetation that shamble through swamps and marshes looking for prey.  They have a roughly bipedal shape, with two “legs” and two “arms.”
Shambling mounds are immune to fire because of their slimy, wet bodies.  They take only half damage from cold, and half damage from weapons of any kind.  Electricity causes a shambling mound to gain one hit die.  If a shambling mound hits with both arms, the victim is enfolded into the slimy body and will suffocate in 2d4 melee rounds unless freed.
Shambling Mound (7HD): HD 7; AC 1[18]; Atk 2 fists (2d8); Move 6; Save 9; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Damage immunities, enfold and suffocate victims.
Shambling Mound (8HD): HD 8; AC 1[18]; Atk 2 fists (2d8); Move 6; Save 8; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Damage immunities, enfold and suffocate victims.
Shambling Mound (9HD): HD 9; AC 1[18]; Atk 2 fists (2d8); Move 6; Save 6; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Damage immunities, enfold and suffocate victims.
Shambling Mound (10HD): HD 10; AC 1[18]; Atk 2 fists (2d8); Move 6; Save 5; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Damage immunities, enfold and suffocate victims.
Shambling Mound (11HD): HD 11; AC 1[18]; Atk 2 fists (2d8); Move 6; Save 4; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: Damage immunities, enfold and suffocate victims.
Shambling Mound (12HD): HD 12; AC 1[18]; Atk 2 fists (2d8); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: Damage immunities, enfold and suffocate victims.

##SHARK
##When there is blood in the water (say, 6hp worth), more sharks will come to investigate (about 1d6 sharks of any size).  All sharks will be attacking madly, and each time a shark attacks there is actually a 1 in 6 chance that it will target another shark instead of a human.  Smaller sharks would have 1HD per foot of length.
##Shark, Small (3HD): HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d4+1); Move 0 (Swim 24); Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Feeding frenzy.
##Shark, Small (4HD): HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d4+1); Move 0 (Swim 24); Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Feeding frenzy.
##Shark, Medium (5HD): HD 5; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+2); Move 0 (Swim 24); Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Feeding frenzy.
##Shark, Medium (6HD): HD 6; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+2); Move 0 (Swim 24); Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Feeding frenzy.
##Shark, Large (7HD): HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d8+4); Move 0 (Swim 24); Save 9; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Feeding frenzy.
##Shark, Large (8HD): HD 8; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d8+4); Move 0 (Swim 24); Save 8; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Feeding frenzy.
##Shark, Giant:(13HD) HD 13; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d10+8); Move 0 (Swim 18); Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Feeding frenzy.

SHOCKER LIZARD
Shocker lizards are large lizards about two feet long and weigh about 25 pounds.  They deliver an electrical shock by touch, and anyone hit by the shock must make a saving throw or be stunned for 1d3 rounds.  If anyone is hit by two or more shocks in a single round (the lizards hunt in groups), the second shock may cause death as well the chance of stunning.
Shocker Lizard: HD 1d6hp; AC 6 [13]; Atk 1 bite (1d3); Move 6; Save 18; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Electric shock.

SHRANGAATHI
Shrangaathi are malevolent river spirits that spend most of their time in the form of almost transparent river-fish. In this form, they pose no threat. However, when a school of shrangaathi encounters a village that does not have some sort of shrine or spirit to protect it, they will wait until nightfall, change form, and attack the unprotected settlement. When attacking on land, the shrangaathi become small humanoids with white, opalescent skin, needle-like teeth, and spindly limbs. They swarm ashore like a school of predatory fish, often stopping to feed on prey that have fallen in battle against them - a single shrangaathi can devour a human to the bones in 4 rounds and then look for more to eat. A single shrangaathi is not a formidable opponent, but any opponent bitten by a shrangaathi has a 5% chance (1 in 20) to lose 1d4 additional hit points from loss of blood (at a rate of 1hp per round). Shrangaathi are affected by turning, although they are not undead: if successfully turned (as ghouls), up to 1d10 of them must make a saving throw or flee back to the river, never to return to that settlement for 1d6+10 days.
Shrangaathi: HD 1d6; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (2d6); Move 9; Save 18; CL/XP B/10; Special: 5% chance to cause bleeding damage, limited vulnerability to turning.

SHRIEKER
Shriekers are huge mushrooms with a tough, fibrous body.  They do not physically attack, but if light shines on them (within about 30ft) or if anything moves near them (within about 10ft), they emit a high-pitched shrieking noise.  This noise causes 1hp damage per round (saving throw applies) to anyone nearby (within about 30ft).  The true danger of shriekers is that they tend to summon wandering monsters.  If they are attacked with missile weapons, they will attempt to shuffle away, although they do not move very fast.
Shrieker: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk None; Move 1; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Shriek.

SILENT KNIGHT
The silent knight is an undead creature resembling a heavily armored zombie armed with knightly weapons. These rather powerful creatures are quite intelligent in a malign, inhuman way. Their presence is in some way commanding to lesser forms of undead such as skeletons and zombies, and when encountered in tombs or other houses of the dead they are often accompanied by battalions of these creatures that have abandoned their original commands to mindlessly follow the silent knight. The most distinguishing feature of the silent knight, though, is that they radiate utter silence in a huge area, a radius of approximately 200ft. The silence is blocked by stone, but creeps down open corridors, often providing warning of the silent knight's approach with his horde of undead minions. Within the area of the knight's silence, it is impossible to turn undead or to cast most spells due to the absence of sound.
Silent Knight: HD 7; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 9; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Silence.

SKARUSOI
The Skarusoi are a race of insectoid bipeds from another world or dimension. Tall and brown, they have shield-like carapaces on their forearms and long feelers sprouting from their heads. They make a muted chittering noise, but seem to communicate with each other through a series of gestures and feeler flicks. Skarusoi attack by buffeting and slashing with their forearm carapace-shields, twice per round, for 1d8 damage each. They may also wield weapons, preferring staves and pole arms, gaining a +2 damage bonus if doing so. A Skarusoi can leap 50ft and attack in the same round.
The Skarusoi also possess strange mental powers. If it foregoes a melee attack, a Skarusoi may cause one of the following effects: (1) Cone of Force, 30ft long x 10ft at end, hurling opponents away and possibly knocking them to the ground (roll lower than strength on a d20); (2) Vortex Leap, whirling the Skarusoi up to 150ft away; (3) Waves of Distress, 15ft radius, causing all creatures drop what they are holding and clutch their heads in agony for 1d4 rounds (saving throw negates); and (4) Blow of Mental Force, causing 4d6 damage to one target within 20ft (save for half). The Skarusoi may use the above mental powers a total of five times per day. In addition, three or more Skarusoi concentrating together can summon an insect swarm (as per the spell).
The Skarusoi are believed to be a mercenary race in a dimensional war that has left countless worlds in ruin. When encountered, they are likely to be upon some mission relating to this war, pursuing tactical objectives incomprehensible to humankind. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Skarusoi: HD 6; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 arm-shields (1d8) or 1 weapon (1d8+2); Move 15; Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Mental powers, 50ft leap.

SKELETAL FURY
The skeletal fury is an undead creature created from the skeleton of a horse, with claws or talons grown from the hooves, horns or antlers grown from the skull, the bones of large bat-like wings grown from the shoulders, and a red glow burning in the eye sockets. Silhouetted against the moon or illuminated by moonlight, faint wispy material seems to line its bones, creating the illusion of ghostly flesh. They are not completely mindless and sometimes display equine mannerisms, such as pawing at the ground or tossing their heads, in a twisted mockery of life. Skeletal furies can be turned by clerics, as ghouls. They are not affected by sleep or charm spells, nor any form of mind reading. Any attempt to read or contact the mind of a skeletal fury that is under the control of a magic-user may result in a brief mental image of the controlling wizard. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Skeletal Fury: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 claws (1d6) and 1 gore (1d6); Move 12 (Fly 12); Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: immune to sleep, charm, mind-reading.

SKELETON
Skeletons are animated bones of the dead, usually under the control of some evil master.
Skeleton: HD 1; AC 8[11] or 7[12] with shield; Atk 1 weapon or strike (1d6) or (1d6+1 two-handed); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: None.

SKELETON, FOSSIL
Fossilized skeletons are normally found only in underground caverns or complexes that have been left undisturbed for millennia, although they might also be found in inter-dimensional pockets, or in areas where the fossilization has been deliberately induced.  In some limestone caverns where the mineralized water is in constant contact with the bones, skeletons might also fossilize relatively quickly – over the course of a hundred years rather than a thousand.  Older fossilized skeletons may show pre-human features; fossilized Neanderthal skeletons are not uncommon.  Since fossilized skeletons are effectively made of rock rather than bone, they are harder to hit and harder to kill than normal skeletons.
Skeleton, Fossil: HD 2; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 weapon or strike (1d8); Move 9; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

SKULLMURAL
The Skullmural appears to be a horrifying skull-like design carved into a wall. It is in fact a bizarre amoeboid creature, suffused with dark mystical power. It may seep slowly along walls, ceilings, and other surfaces, positioning itself for attack, which can cause adventurers to think they have made a mistake in mapping. If anyone touches the skullmural, the creature gains a free attack, at +4 to hit. The skullmural attacks by fastening tiny protoplasmic hooks and suckers into flesh to drink the victim's blood and other juices. Once attached, it drains 1d6 hit points per round and does not stop until killed or driven off with flame, alcohol, or melted butter. If blood is poured out near a skullmural, it will occupy itself with the blood rather than attacking humans. A sated skullmural changes to a reddish colour and bloats slightly, seeping back to its original position. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr"). 
Skullmural: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 strike (1d6); Move 3; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Drains fluids.

SKUNK, GIANT
Giant skunks spray a horrible-smelling musk at anyone attacking them, and it is so much more powerful than the musk of normal-sized skunks as to actually be corrosive.  The cloud of spray fills a cone 20ft wide at the point, 60ft long, and 60ft wide at the end.  Any cloth or unprotected paper in this area dissolves.  Leather items have a 20% chance of dissolving.  Living creatures are overcome by nausea for 1d6 turns (saving throw), and may also be blinded for 3d6 turns (a second saving throw).  The stench remains forever until 1d6 days of washing are completed (washing with tomato juice succeeds on the first or second try, though).
Giant Skunk: HD 4; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6); Move 9; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Sprays musk.

SKY WORM
Sky worms, or "worms of the sky," are spiny worms ten feet long, with bat wings sprouting from behind a monstrous head. They are generally dark purple-grey in colour, with red eyes; some have segmented bodies, while others are more rubbery. The sky worm's head is a nightmare catfish-like thing, with long feelers and a gaping maw. Native to distant, cloud-wrapped mountain peaks, sky worms can be captured and trained to serve as aerial mounts.
A worm of the sky may bite for 1d6 damage, and lash with its tail for 1d4 damage. The tail lash is capable of dismounting an enemy rider. Trained worms of the sky can roll in mid-flight to tail-lash a mounted opponent or block their riders from arrows. They are also trained to dive after and catch a falling rider. Trained sky worms develop an empathic bond with their riders, gaining a vicious +2 bonus on attack and damage rolls if the bonded rider is slain or incapacitated. In the wild, they “dance” in thunderstorms.  (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr"). 
Sky Worm: HD 3+1; AC 6 [13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6) and 1 tail lash (1d4); Move 6 (Fly 18); Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Fly, protect rider.

SLITHERAT
Slitherats are a bizarre variant of the giant rat, sometimes found in places with heavy crystalline mineral deposits.  These rodents have a long (4ft) snakelike body covered in fur, with four almost vestigial legs on each side.  The long body tapers into a ratlike tail at the end, adding another foot to the creature’s overall length.  The head, although large, is clearly that of a giant rat; but the long front teeth glitter, for they are made of thin, sharp diamond.  Because the teeth are so hard and sharp, slitherats attack with a +1 bonus to hit, and inflict 1d6+1 damage.  These strange creatures use their teeth to dig through earth and solid rock when they encounter such obstacles, but they pass through crystal as if it were not even present, leaving no trace of their passage.  The diamond teeth from a single slitherat are worth 250gp.
Slitherats: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+1); Move 12 (Burrow 9, through crystal 24); Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Slide through crystal, +1 to hit.

SLITHERING TRACKER
Perhaps the most dangerous of wandering monsters.  Slithering trackers are a form of transparent slug, possibly related to gelatinous cubes.  They are difficult to see (10% chance for a person to spot it, and he may lose sight of it again in the next round).  Unless they are starving, they do not attack moving prey (5% chance to be starving).  Instead, they follow the potential prey until it sleeps or camps.  They can ooze under doors and through fairly small cracks, so even a barricaded room with a closed door is probably not safe.  When it attacks, the victim must make a saving throw or be paralyzed by the slitherer’s secretions.  A paralyzed victim will be sucked dry of all body fluids in 5 turns (50 minutes), losing 20% of hit points each 10 minutes.
Slithering Tracker: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk None; Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Transparent, paralysis.

SLOORG (Midden Monster)
Sloorgs are a form of animate filth. Lumpy brown and oozing constantly, with distended vaguely human-like features at one end, they seem to arise spontaneously from poorly maintained sewers and midden-heaps. Missiles are ineffective against them, adding mass to the body instead of damaging it, and any hand-held weapon striking it may be added to the body if the wielder fails a saving throw. The sloorg gains one hit point for each item accidentally added to it, often making a low rumbling sound like a mockery of laughter when it does so. The sloorg flows through semi-permeable barriers such as gratings, chairs, and hasty barricades, and might pause to spend a round adding the obstacle to its mass. Anyone within 20’ must make a saving throw or suffer -2 to all dice rolls from nausea. Anyone coming into contact with it – whether attacking or attacked – must make a saving throw to avoid contracting a non-fatal but debilitating disease. Sloorg take 1d6 points of damage per level of the caster of a Purify Food and Drink, Cure Disease, Neutralise Poison, or Locate Object spell. All physical attacks against a sloorg cause minimum damage. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Sloorg: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 touch (1d8); Move 6; Save 14; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Minimum damage from weapons, immune to missiles, heals by enveloping objects, cause nausea, cause disease.

SLUG, GIANT
These tremendously large masses of slimy, rubbery flesh are completely immune to blunt weapons.  In addition to their powerful bite, giant slugs can spit their acidic saliva (one target at a time).  The base range for spitting is 60ft, and within this range the slug’s spittle will be 50% likely to hit (no to-hit roll required).  For every additional 10ft of range, the chance to hit decreases by 10%.  On its first spitting attack, the slug only has a 10% chance to hit within 60ft, and no chance of hitting beyond that range.  Some giant slugs might have more or less virulent acidity (thus changing the damage inflicted).
Slug, Giant: HD 12; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 bite (1d12) or acid squirt; Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Spit acid

SNAKE
Vipers are highly poisonous, and about a foot or two in length.  Their poison is lethal, but the saving throw is at a bonus of +2. Cobras are about four to six feet long, and their poison is lethal with a normal saving throw.  Constrictors are not poisonous, but if they hit, they do automatic damage from constriction thereafter.
Snake, Viper: HD 1d6hp; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1hp + poison); Move 12; Save 18; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Lethal poison (+2 save).
Snake, Cobra: HD 1; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite/spit (1hp + poison); Move 12; Save 17; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Lethal poison.
Snake, Constrictor: HD 2; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 constriction (1d3); Move 9; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Constriction.

SNAKE, JAVELIN
These snakes can be found anywhere that they may obtain a position where they can fall upon their intended victims. They strike as if they were javelins thrown by a 4HD creature, and the points of their heads are very sharp. These snakes are very fond of wine and will go out of their way to obtain some, thus wine merchants are often the targets of their attacks. One of their most distinguishing features is their three-pronged tongue. (Contributed by Sean "Stonegiant" Stone).
Snake, Javelin : HD 1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 impale (1d6); Move 6; Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Attack as 4HD creature.

SNAKE, GIANT POISONOUS
Giant vipers and cobras are about ten feet long,
Snake, Giant Poisonous: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d3 + poison); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Lethal poison

SNAKE, GIANT CONSTRICTOR
Giant constrictors are twenty to thirty feet long,
The constrictors do automatic constriction damage after hitting, and may also manage to pinion an arm or leg (1 in 6 chance).
Snake, Giant Constrictor: HD 6; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d3), 1 constrict (2d4); Move 10; Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Constrict

SNAKE, GIANT AMPHIS
Amphisbaena (two headed snakes) are about seven feet long.
Each of the amphisbaena’s heads functions independently. Moreover, if an amphisbaena sustains a melee hit equal to half its original hit points, it is considered “cut in half.” Both independent halves will grow replacement heads in 1d4+2 rounds.
Snake, Giant Amphisbaena: HD 5; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 bite (1d3 + poison); Move 10; Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Lethal Poison

SNAKE, GIANT SPITTING
Giant spitting snakes are about ten feet long (these are identical to regular giant poisonous snakes, with the exception of the poison spit).
The spitting snakes have a range of 40ft, aiming at one target with the poison.
Snake, Giant Spitting: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d3 + poison) or spit poison; Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Spit or bite with lethal poison.

SORCERER OX
A Sorcerer Ox may at first glance be mistaken for a Minotaur. It is a member of a race of humanoid oxen, gifted with magical abilities, clad in an embroidered silken robe, taller than humans, and bearing long curving horns capped with tassels. The clothing and jewellery of a sorcerer ox is worth 200-500 GP, and each has a 25% chance of possessing a minor magical item usable by magic-users.
The great size and strength of a sorcerer ox grants it a +2 damage bonus when wielding weapons (usually an ornate staff). All sorcerer oxen have the spell abilities of a magic-user of level 5 (more powerful ones exist as well), and prefer spells with an elemental theme (metal, flame, wind, water, and wood). Twice per day they may catch a weapon aimed at them and cause it to rot or rust away within seconds. Each morning they consult their horoscopes for favourable signs, and so once per day may add a +2 bonus to any one dice roll. However, if they neglect to observe their chosen taboo (not drinking alcoholic beverages, for example, or making an offering of incense to nature spirits) they suffer a -2 penalty to all dice rolls relating to their spells on that day. Lastly, anyone who speaks with a sorcerer ox for more than 1 turn will act as if under a Charm Person spell, although the good-natured sorcerer ox will be loath to exploit this effect of their eloquence and trustworthiness unless in dire circumstances.
Having the strength and stamina of an ox, a sorcerer ox is willing to undertake hard work if he should fall upon hard times, and one of them can easily perform the work of three manual laborers. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Sorcerer Ox: HD 4+2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 fist (1d6) or weapon (1d8+2); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Spells as magic-user level 5, catch and destroy weapon (2/day), horoscope bonus (+2 on one roll), charm.

SORCERY LEECH
Sorcery Leeches resemble, well…leeches. These tiny critters are often used by Wizards and Mages to subtly deplete an arcane foe’s magical arsenal. If a Sorcery Leech attaches itself to someone, it will slowly siphon off the spells pressed into the magic-user's mind. For each round a sorcery leech remains attached to a magic-user, it may deplete 1 level worth of memorized spell (a sorcery leech attached for 3 rounds may siphon a 3rd level spell). The damage inflicted by the leech's siphoning is so negligible that the wizard is usually unaware that something is amiss until he attempts to cast a siphoned spell. (Contributed by Skathros).
Sorcery Leeches: HD 1 hp; AC 9[10]; Atk negligible (0); Move 1; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Arcane Siphon

SOULSPINNER
These spirit-creatures inhabit ghostly planes of existence, but often hunt in the material planes - often making their lairs in dark or desolate places. They resemble spiders, but their eight eyes are human rather than insectoid. They are insubstantial, and can only be hit by magical or silver weapons; they are affected normally by spells. The soulspinner spins an incorporeal web, and can shoot these out as a cone 50ft in length and to a width at the end of the cone of 50ft. Anyone entering these webs (which are visible but ghostly) must make a saving throw or become enervated, operating as if at one level of experiance lower than normal. Clerical spells cannot be cast through the webs, although magic-user spells operate normally for a webbed character. The webs adhere to anyone entering the webs, but their effects wear off after 1d6 hours. If a soulspinner bites a victim, the victim must make a saving throw or be affected in the same way as if caught in the webs (and the temporary loss of levels is cumulative if a victim is both webbed and bitten). Anyone killed by a soulspinner, if raised from the dead, will have a chaotic alignment unless or until some additional magical remedy is provided, such as remove curse.
Soulspinner: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d6 + temporary loss of level); Move 12; Save 13; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Enervating webs, incorporeal, only hit by magic or silver weapons, enervating bite.

SPECTRAL SCAVENGER
The spectral scavenger is an undead creature appears as a dark, billowing, wraith-like creature, with a skull for a head and bony claws for hands. It can attack with its bony claws, but will generally attack with any magical weapons it has, or with its spell-like powers noted below. These creatures can use any magical sword to hurl a Lightning Bolt of 5d6 strength, up to thrice per day. A spectral scavenger can also cause bony hands to erupt from the ground, (twice per day) completely restraining 1d3 targets (range 40ft, saving throw negates). Being of a wraithlike nature, these monsters cannot be damaged by weapons of a non-magical nature. They regenerate at the rate of 2 hit points per round, except from damage caused by holy water, fire, acid, or spells. If one slays an opponent with a magical sword, it additionally regenerates 1d8 hp in that round. A spectral scavenger will possess 1d3 magic items; the first will be a sword. Magical armour will not be possessed, and nor will potions. Any scrolls or wands will be used freely, and rings are especially prized. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Spectral Scavenger: HD 8; AC 2[18]; Atk 1 magic sword (1d8 + bonus); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: undead immunities, regeneration, lightning bolt, skeletal hands, magical weapon to hit.

SPECTRE
Specters are wraith-like undead creatures without corporeal bodies.  When a specter hits an opponent, either with hand or weapon, the touch drains two levels from the victim.  Only magical weapons can damage a specter.  In some cases, these terrifying creatures may be mounted upon living beasts, if the beasts have been trained to tolerate proximity to the undead.  Any being killed (or drained below level 0) by a specter becomes a specter himself, a pitiful thrall to its creator.
Spectre: HD 7; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 spectral weapon or touch (1d8 + level drain); Move 15 (Fly 30); Save 9; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Drain 2 levels with hit, immune to non-magical weapons.

SPECTRE, PARASITIC
Parasitic spectres are like normal spectres, in that they are undead creatures lacking corporeal bodies. Tortured by their insubstantial existence, they hunger to obtain corporeal bodies by possessing humanoid creatures. Possessed creatures are under the total control of the spectre, although they are somehow unable to cause direct harm to themselves. The victim of a parasitic sprectre may (at the player's option) make a new saving throw each round to expel the spectre; success deals 1d8 hit points of damage both to the victim and to the spectre, and expels the spectre. If a possessed creature is slain, the corpse will instantly transform into an undead creature, having abilities identical to those of a wight. If such a "wight" is destroyed, the spectre is expelled, taking 2d8 hit points of damage in the process. Non-magical weapons cannot harm a parasitic spectre. Note that parasitic spectres can possess corpses as well as living beings, and transform them immediately into wight-form, but they cannot possess corpses that have been dead more than a few minutes. (Contributed by Random).
Spectre, Parasitic: HD 7; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 strike (1d8 + possession); Move 15 (Fly 30); Save 9; CL/XP: 9/1100; Special: Possession (saving throw negates).

SPHINX, ANDROSPHINX
The noble androsphinx has the bearded head of a man, the body of a lion, and the wings of an eagle.  The roar of an androsphinx  (3/day) is mythic: the first roar causes Fear within 400ft (saving throw), the second roar causes paralysis (saving throw) for 1d4 rounds within 300ft, and the third roar causes the loss of 2d6 points of strength (saving throw), within 200ft,with strength points recovered at a rate of 1 per round.  Creatures within 20ft of the third roar must also make a saving throw or be stunned for 2d6 rounds.
Androsphinxes are spell casters, casting clerical spells (2/2/1/1).  A common spell list is: level 1: cure light wounds x2; level 2: hold person; level 3: remove curse (or, cure disease).
Sphinx, Androsphinx: HD 12; AC 0[19]; Atk 2 claws (2d6); Move 18 (Fly 24); Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: Spells, Roar.

SPHINX, CRIOSPHINX
The criosphinx has the head of a ram, the body of a lion, and the wings of an eagle.  This variety of sphinx is neutral with regard to human affairs, and they have a tendency to create impromptu toll-roads.
Sphinx, Criosphinx: HD 10; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d8), head butt (2d6); Move 18 (Fly 24); Save 5; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: None

SPHINX, GYNOSPHINX
A gynosphinx has the head and upper torso of a woman, the body of a lion, and the wings of an eagle.  The female human arms become lion legs by the point of the forearm.  Gynosphinxes are probably smarter than other varieties of sphinx (enjoying riddles), but they are quite willing to consider humans as prey.  The gynosphinx can cast dispel magic (at 8th level) three times per day. They also have considerable powers of divination, being able to answer most questions posed to them – but for a hefty price.
Sphinx, Gynosphinx: HD 8; AC 1[18]; Atk 2 claws (1d8); Move 18 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Divination, Dispel

SPHINX, HIERACOSPHINX
The hieracosphinx has the head and forelegs of a hawk, with the hindquarters of a lion.  This variety of sphinx is decidedly malevolent, evil, and/or chaotic in temperament.
Sphinx, Hieracosphinx: HD 9; AC 3[16]; Atk 2 claws (1d6+1), 1 bite (1d10); Move 9 (Fly 30); Save 7; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: None.

##SPIDER, GIANT
##Giant spiders are aggressive hunters.  Only the 6ft diameter giant spiders are web builders.  Giant spider webs require a saving throw to avoid becoming stuck.  Those making a saving throw can fight in, and move at a rate of 5ft per round through, the webs.  Medium-Sized giant spiders surprise on a roll of 1-5, being able to hide well in shadows.
##Phase spiders can shift out of phase with their surroundings (can be attacked only be ethereal creatures), coming back into phase to attack.
##Giant Spider (1ft diameter): HD 1+1; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 bite (1hp + poison); Move 9; Save 17; CL/XP 3/60; Special: lethal poison (+2 saving throw)
##Giant Spider (4ft diameter): HD 2+2; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6 + poison); Move 18; Save 16; CL/XP 5/240; Special: lethal poison, 5 in 6 chance to surprise prey.
##Giant Spider (6ft diameter): HD 4+2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+2 + poison); Move 4; Save 13; CL/XP 7/600; Special: lethal poison, webs.
##Giant Phase Spider: HD 2+2; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6 + poison); Move 18; Save 16; CL/XP 6/400; Special: lethal poison (+1 save or die), dimension phasing.

SPIDER, GIANT, INVISIBLE
6ft diameter. Giant invisible spiders are similar in most respects to the largest type of giant spider, but they are invisible and so are their webs. Their poison is slower-acting: if the victim fails a saving throw, the poison paralyzes for 3d6 rounds before the victim dies, and also turns the victim invisible. If the spider successfully paralyzes its prey, it will try to haul it up into its ceiling lair, waiting for any other dangerous adventurers to give up the search and leave.
Spider, Giant Invisible: HD 4+2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+2 + poison); Move 4; Save 13; CL/XP 8/800; Special: slow-acting lethal poison, webs, invisibility.

SPIDER, FLAGSTONE
This race of spiders has completely adapted to living in dungeon and dungeon-like enviroments. Its central body appears to be nothing more than a flagstone with 6 chitinous legs sprouting from the edges of either side. It has a mouth with fangs, two eyestalks, and two front legs ending with hook-like appendages. All of its legs can be retracted into the stone-like exoskeleton. The hooked front legs are used to pry flagstones loose, allowing the spider to hide as part of a stone floor, but they are also used for attack and defense. The flagstone spider's bite is poisonous (save at +4 or die). When waiting for prey, the spider is undistinguishable from other flagstones 90% of the time (with any adjustments the referee deems appropriate). If potential victims fail to notice them, they will attack with surprise 50% off the time (1-3 on d6). Some adventurers have reported entire hallways floored with these vermin. (Contributed by Sean Stone).
Spider, Flagstone: AC 3(16); HD 1d4hps; Atk 2 claws (1d2) and 1 bite (0hp + poison); Move 15; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: poisonous bite (+4 save or die), surprise on 1-3 on d6.

SPIDERWEED
Spiderweed is an ambulatory plant that has adapted to mimic the appearance of giant spiders as a means of defense. A single spiderweed is usually about the size of a dog, although they can grow much larger in the wild. In conditions of poor light, such as in a dungeon or a dense forest, one will appear to be a giant spider.  If it is attacked, spiderweed responds by lashing out with two of its thorny appendages. These cause 1d4 damage, and secrete a sticky, poisonous sap. This sap will stick to flesh and clothing, unless thoroughly washed off. It inflicts no damage, but causes a very painful rash for 4d4 hours that causes a penalty of -2 to all die rolls (saving throw negates). Goblins are immune to spiderweed rash.
Spiderweed: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 thorn slashes (1d4 + sap); Move 6; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Sap.

SPINE RAT
Spine rats are as long as a human’s arm, red-eyed, and covered in spiny overlapping scales; they appear to be the product of some sort of crossbreeding between rats and lizards. A ridge of spines along the back runs from neck to tail.  Due to the muck and slime of their habitat, the ridge-spines of a spine rat are likely to be tainted with soiled material. Anyone jabbed by a spine must make a saving throw or contract a disease that leaves them bed-ridden and fevered for 3d6 days. The bite of a spine rat is not especially dangerous, and only leads to the risk of infection if the wound is not cleaned.
Rare varieties of spine rats are able to shake spines from their backs like tiny darts; and extremely rare large specimens may be able to walk in semi-bipedal fashion and craft crude tools and weapons.
Rat, Spine: HD 1d4hp; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d3) or spine (1d3 + poison); Move 12; Save 18; CL/XP A/5; Special: Diseased spines.

SPIRE MONKEY
The Spire Monkey is a two-headed, six-armed monkey that lives on roofs (spires and minarets are preferred) and high in the treetops. In some tropical countries they are tolerated in cities as messengers of the gods, and roam temples with impunity. Omnivorous and foul-tempered, they race from rooftop to rooftop and steal food (and occasionally loose coins or trinkets) from the streets below. Spire monkeys attack by clawing, as well as by throwing rocks or other small objects (such as roof tiles), and can divide their attacks between two opponents. They can climb as fast as they can run, and leap from tree to tree or building to building. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Monkey, Spire: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 3 claws (1d3); Move 15; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

SQUID, GIANT
Giant squid are one of the more feared sort of sea monster; they can sink small vessels and occasionally try to pick prey off the decks even of large ships.  These creatures are often mistaken for a true kraken, but they are not intelligent.  The squid’s tentacles constrict for 1d8+1 points of damage after the first hit, and they are used to pull food to the creature’s deadly beak, which it keeps below the water.  When a tentacle hits, roll 1d6: 1= both arms pinned, 2= right arm pinned, 3= left arm pinned, 4-6= arms are not pinned.  A giant squid’s tentacles can take 10hp of damage before being severed, but attacking tentacles does not affect the squid’s actual hit point total – only attacks to the body and head affect the squid’s true hit points.
Squid, Giant: HD 12; AC 7[12] head and tentacles; 3[16] body; Atk 8 tentacles (1d8+1), 1 beak (5d4); Move 0 (Swim 20); Save 3; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: Constrict

SQUID, GIANT AERIAL
Giant aerial squids are cousins of the normal giant squid, but their bodies are filled with lighter-than-air gases that allow them to float in the air.  In general, they are found in mountains, where they pick mountain goats and goblins off the slopes as food.  Giant aerial squid can grow up to 60ft in length.  The squid’s tentacles constrict for 1d8+1 points of damage after the first hit, and they are used to pull food to the sharp beak.  When a tentacle hits, roll 1d6: 1= both arms pinned, 2= right arm pinned, 3= left arm pinned, 4-6= arms are not pinned.  The tentacles can take 10hp of damage before being severed, but attacking tentacles does not affect the squid’s actual hit point total – only attacks to the body and head affect the squid’s true hit points.  These creatures are not good mounts, for they have a tendency to reach back and eat their riders.
Squid, Giant Aerial: HD 12; AC 7[12] head and tentacles; 3[16] body; Atk 8 tentacles (1d8+1), 1 beak (5d4); Move 0 (Fly 20); Save 3; CL/XP 14/2600; Special: Constrict

STAG, GIANT
The Pleistocene stag stands 8-9ft at the shoulder, and has antlers spreading 10ft across.  Giant stags might also be magical rather than prehistoric, in which case they might be very intelligent or even have additional magical abilities.
Stag, Giant: HD 4; AC 7[12]; Atk 2 antlers (2d6); Move 20; Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

STAR-MOUTHED WORM
The star-mouthed worm is a horrendous creature 20ft in length, a massive segmented worm. The front of the worm's body trifurcates into three parts, each with a swallowing mouth surrounded by a membranous fan of skin. In combat, the worm bites with its mouths, the membranes around each mouth flailing and contracting to grab and pull prey inside. If the worm hits with a natural attack roll of 19 or 20, man-sized or smaller prey will be swallowed whole. Being swallowed whole inflicts an automatic 1d8 points of damage per round from digestive juices; one can, however, attack the worm from within, using a dagger-sized weapon against the worm's internal armor class of 9[10]. Star-mouthed worms cannot swallow more than two man-sized meals, and will generally seek to retreat peacefully once they have filled themselves. If they accidentally swallow a third person, they will choke and die in 1d4 rounds.
Star-Mouthed Worm: HD 10; AC 4[15]; Atk 3 mouths (1d10); Move 9; Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Swallow whole on 19 or 20.

STIRGE
Resembling small, feathered, winged anteaters, stirges have a proboscis which they jab into their prey to drain blood.  After a stirge’s first hit, it drains blood automatically at a rate of 1d4 per round.
Stirge: HD 1+1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 proboscis (1d3); Move 3 (Fly 18); Save 17; CL/XP 1/15; Special: blood drain (1d4), +2 to hit bonus.

STONEFLOWER
A stoneflower resembles a pile of rock about five feet in diameter, covered with exquisitely realized carved flowers. In actuality, these beasts are from some other dimension, or possibly the elemental plane of earth. The whole growth, including the rock, is a sentient predator that can morph through stone walls, flowing along quite rapidly as long as it is touching stone. They cannot cross water or wooden surfaces. The flowers of the growth are its weapons; they can eject rocks at very high speeds, causing 1d3 points of damage. In any combat round, the stoneflower can eject 1d6 such missiles. The growth is also extremely magnetic; any metal weapon touching the stoneflower will stick to it until the creature is killed (unless the wielder has a strength of 15+).
Stoneflower: HD 3; AC 1[18]; Atk 1d6 hurled stones (1d3 each); Move 9; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Magnetic, moves through stone.

SUMATRAN RAT-GHOUL
These horrid undead creatures are not much larger than a giant rat; they resemble tiny humans but with twisted, feral features, grey skin, and no hair other than a line of rat-fur down their backs. They obviously have never been human; they are carrion eaters of the grave, an undead vermin whose horrid similarity to human beings is (one hopes) a twisted coincidence. Sumatran rat-ghouls travel with packs of giant rats, raiding graves and tombs for their abominable food. Their bite causes paralysis, much like that of a normal ghoul, but the effect lasts only 2d6 combat rounds (a saving throw will negate the effect, and the saving throw is made at +2). Like ghouls, they are immune to sleep spells.
Sumatran rat-ghoul: HD 1d6hp; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 9; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: Paralytic bite (+2 save).

SYCOREX (ARCHÆOPTERYX POTENS)
The Sycorex is a quasi-prehistoric flying, feathered lizard, vast in size, which prefers warmer climates and is a voracious carnivore. Sycorex are only slightly smaller than Black Dragons, but they are not related to dragon-kind, having a long, straight beak with sharp teeth, and feathers rather than hard scales. They have an ear-piercing shriek that is typically heard as they enter a hawk-like dive from out of the sun, deafening their prey and relying on the sunlight to partially blind them as well. The shriek of a Sycorex functions as a Hold Person spell. It is rumored that men in far-off lands may have tamed the Sycorex, and ride them into battle. (Contributed by darthmike).
Sycorex: HD 5; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (2d8); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Shriek

TANGLE WEED/STRANGLE VINE
Tangle Weeds and Strangle Vines are essentially the same creature, the only difference being that the Tangle Weed attacks its victims from below, while the Strangle Vine attacks from above. In appearance, they resemble a mass of weeds or vines, their animate nature only becoming apparent during an attack.
On a successful attack, the animate plant has a 2 in 6 chance of entangling its foe, immobilizing its prey and slowly strangling the life out of him. Each round, the victim will suffer 1d6 points of damage due to the strangulation. A successful save is required to break free of the immobilizing, strangling grasp. (Contributed by Skathros).
Tangle Weed/Strangle Vine: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 4 vines (1d6); Save 13; Move 0; CL/XP 6/400.

TATZELWORM
These curious creatures inhabit cold alpine peaks. In appearance, they look like silvery fat-bodied lizards lacking hind legs. They can move surprisingly fast, slithering on their stomachs, and can leap up to 10ft. They are notoriously aggressive and will not hesitate to attack larger creatures that intrude upon their territory. When leaping to the attack, they gain a +1 bonus to hit.
The bite of a tatzelworm is deadly, and a victim must successfully save versus poison or die.
These cold-loving reptiles save at +1 against cold-based attacked, and such damage against them is reduced by 1 hit point per die. They save versus fire normally. (Contributed by John Turcotte).
 Tatzelworm: HD 1d6hp; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d3hp + lethal poison); Move 12; Save 18; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Lethal poison, leap (+1 to hit), partial resistance to cold.

TENDRICULOS
A tendriculos is a plant creature resembling a hillock or haystack, but it is a voracious predator that uses tendrils and a powerful bite to kill and digest prey.  If the tendriculos hits with both tendrils, the victim must make a saving throw or be swallowed whole.  Each round spent within the plant’s body automatically inflicts 1d6 hit points of acid damage and necessitates a saving throw to avoid being paralyzed for 1d4+1 rounds.
Tendriculos: HD 8; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 tendrils (1d6), 1 bite (2d6); Move 9; Save 8; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Swallow whole.

THELIDU (Brain Demons)
The Thelidu (the term is both singular and plural) are a hateful species of conquerors from Outside who use use weird devices to travel to other worlds in search of slaves and resources. Possessing scaly, rubbery, vaguely humanoid bodies, the Thelidu have octopus-like heads and faces that are masses of feelers. Gelatinous green in color, these monstrosities are worshipped as near-gods on countless worlds -- and feared on countless more. Obsessed with the purity of their own species, the Thelidu regularly engage in internecine wars to exterminate the "unfit" in their midst, an activity they enjoy even more than conquering and enslaving other species. This trait is one of the few things that have saved worlds from Thelidu conquest, as these alien beings are relentless in their campaigns of domination.
Thelidu are masters of the mind, which has earned them the sobriquet "brain demons," even though they are not in fact demons of any kind and indeed view demons are just another species to be conquered. All Thelidu are capable of using several abilities that mimic the effects of arcane spells: charm monster, charm person, clairaudience, clairvoyance, ESP, levitate, and suggestion. In addition, a successful melee hit on a single target with both claws and tentacles results in death in 1d6 rounds, as the Thelidu cracks open the victim's skull and extracts its brain, resulting in immediate death.
The extracted brain is then added to cerebral devices known as Brain Complexes, of which every Thelidu band possesses at least one. The precise purpose of the Brain Complexes is unknown but some sages surmise that they create and/or power many of the other queer devices the Thelidu carry with them as they scour the cosmos for worlds to conquer. Whatever the truth of the matter, the appearance of these beings on any world ought to be a cause for alarm and swift retaliation, lest they gain a foothold from which they can never be dislodged.  (Contributed by James Malizsewski).
Thelidu: HD 4+3; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 claws (1d6) and 1 tentacles (1d4); Move 13; Save 12; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Mental powers, brain extraction.

THUGTOAD
Thugtoads are bipedal toad-men, normally about 4ft tall, but with some growing as large as 6ft.  Thugtoads can hop as far as 30ft to attack, adding +1 to hit and inflicting double damage when they do so.  Because their skin color changes to match their surroundings, they have a 75% chance not to be noticed when waiting in ambush.
Thugtoad: HD 1; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 weapon (1d6); Move 4 (Swim 15); Save 17; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Camouflage, hop.

THYLACINE
Commonly known as the “Lemurian Wolf” or "Ekaru," Thylacines are carnivorous marsupials with a body somewhat like a wolf's, although they are not related to wolves or dogs. Thylacines are found in all climates, but prefer forested hills to open areas. Hunters have killed Thylacines that measured seven and a half feet from the tip of the nose to end of the tail. The thylacine's most dangerous attribute is a large powerful jaw that can be overextended for a disproportionately large bite. They hunt at night in groups similar to wolf packs. When agitated a Thylacine will rear up on its hind legs and secrete a musky odor before leaping on the intended victim. Though they have a poor sense of smell their eyesight is very sharp. Their keen intellect and pack hunting instincts see them employed as guards in certain noble or wizards gardens.  (Contributed by darthmike).
Thylacine: HD 2+1; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+1); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

TICK, GIANT
Giant ticks drain blood at a rate of 4 hit points per round after a successful hit.  Their bite causes disease, which will kill the victim in 2d4 days (Cure Disease spells will remove the infection).  A giant tick can be forced off a victim by fire as well as by killing the beast.
Giant Tick: HD 3; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 3; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Drain blood.

TIGER
If a tiger hits the same target with both fore claws, it can rake with its rear claws as well, gaining two more claw attacks.  Yes, tigers swim, which can be a nasty surprise for fleeing adventurers.
Tiger: HD 6; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d4+1), 1 bite (1d8); Move 15 (Swim 6); Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Rear claws

TIGER, SABRE-TOOTH
Sabre-tooth tigers are larger than normal tigers and have huge, curving, front fangs.  Like normal tigers, if they hit with both fore claws, they can pull up to rake with their rear claws (2 additional attacks).
Tiger, Sabre-tooth: HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d4+1), 1 bite (2d6); Move 12 (Swim 6); Save 10; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Rear claws

TITAN
Titans are incredibly powerful beings, almost as powerful as the gods (and possibly they are older than the gods themselves).  A titan has 2 spells of each spell level from first level magic user spells to 7th level magic user spells, and 2 clerical spells of each spell level from first to 7th.  The GM might choose to substitute other magical abilities for spells – these creatures vary considerably in powers and personalities from one to the next.
One possible spell list for a titan might include the following. Magic User: Charm Person (1), Sleep (1), Invisibility (1), Mirror Image (1), Fireball (3), Fly (3), Polymorph Other (4), Confusion (4), Conjure Elemental (5), Feeblemind (5), Anti-magic Shell (6), Stone to Flesh (6), Limited Wish (7), Power Word Stun (7). Clerical: Light (1), Protection From Evil (1), Hold Person (2), Speak with Animals (2), Cure Disease (3), Dispel Magic (3), Cure Serious Wounds (4), Neutralize Poison (4), Finger of Death (5), Quest (5), Blade Barrier (6), Word of Recall (6), Earthquake x2  (7), Resurrection (Raise Dead Fully)
Titan (17HD) HD 17; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 weapon (2d8); Move 21; Save 3; CL/XP 19/4100; Special: Spells.
Titan (18HD) HD 18; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 weapon (2d8); Move 21; Save 3; CL/XP 20/4400; Special: Spells.
Titan (19HD) HD 19; AC 0[19]; Atk 1 weapon (2d8); Move 21; Save 3; CL/XP 21/4700; Special: Spells.
Titan (20HD) HD 20; AC –1[20]; Atk 1 weapon (2d8); Move 21; Save 3; CL/XP 22/5100; Special: Spells.
Titan (21HD) HD 21; AC –2[21]; Atk 1 weapon (2d8); Move 21; Save 3; CL/XP 23/5400; Special: Spells.
Titan (22HD) HD 22; AC –3[22]; Atk 1 weapon (2d8); Move 21; Save 3; CL/XP 24/5700; Special: Spells.

TOAD, GIANT
Giant toads are about the size and weight of a human.  They are predators, willing to attack creatures as large as men.  Giant toads can attack at the end of a hop, which is in addition to the toad’s normal move.
Toad, Giant: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d8); Move 6 (Hop 30ft); Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Hop

TOAD, GIANT ICE
These bizarre creatures are as intelligent as men (perhaps more so), and use their long, unwebbed fore-toes to carve structures and tunnels in the ice.  They use tools, but do not bother with weapons, for their toothy mouths are quite deadly.  An ice toad can radiate intense, damaging cold (10ft) once every second melee round, causing 2d6 points of damage.  They can also hop to attack, as giant toads do.  In the wilds of the arctic regions, in the deserts of snow and ice, there may be entire cities of these unusual beings, perhaps even civilizations remaining from times before known history.
Toad, Giant Ice: HD 5; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d10+2); Move 9 (Hop 10ft); Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Radiate cold.

TOAD, GIANT POISONOUS
Giant poisonous toads bite with lethal poison, and their skin is also poisonous to the touch.  They are about the size of a large dog, and can attack at the end of a hop, just as non-poisonous giant toads do.  These toads can sometimes be brightly colored in vibrant reds and greens.
Toad, Giant Poisonous: HD 2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d6 + poison); Move 6 (Hop 30ft); Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Poison skin and bite

TODAWAN MASTER
Todawan masters are an enigmatic race of solitary giant toads that have achieved mystic enlightenment. They wear robes and carry a staff. Living solitary lives in the depths of dangerous swamps, todawan masters do not accept students but occasionally answer questions about the future when worthy individuals seek them out. Unfortunately, some todawan masters go bad. These subtle servants of chaos and ruin may assemble bands of thugtoads or other minions, and begin to act as evil masterminds. Such chaotic todawan masters do not often leave their swamps, but their influence can be felt far and wide through the use of assassins, spies, and soldiery. Any todawan master (lawful or chaotic) is a formidable foe. In combat, provided they have at least 40ft for the jump, they can leap into battle and deliver a tremendously powerful kick with their hind legs for 2d6 points of damage; the victim must make a saving throw or be hurled back ten feet to lie prone on the ground, stunned for 1d4 rounds. Todawan masters can block missile weapons with their whirling staffs, with a 75% chance to deflect incoming missiles before the to-hit roll is even made. Their mental discipline is such that they take only half damage from fire and cold. They are immune to all forms of mental control and illusion. Once per day, a todawan master can make a powerful mental attack, suggesting that the victim not follow some course of action. If the victim fails a saving throw (made at -4), he will become unable to force himself to follow whatever course of action the todawan master has prohibited. The skin of a todawan master is coated in an extremely hallucinogenic substance. (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Todawan Master: HD 8; AC 1[18]; Atk 2 staff (1d6) or 1 kick (2d6 + special); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP 11/1400; Special: leaping kick, block missiles (75%), half damage from fire and cold, immune to mental control and illusion, mental suggestion (1/day).

TORTHRI
At first glance, a Torthri may be mistaken for a well-fed leopard or jaguar. While they are related to large feline predators, they are semi-bipedal and of near-human intelligence. In some lands they are venerated as nature spirits and pass freely through humanoid villages. A torthri is capable of walking on all fours, but it can also rise up on its hind legs, and the elongated forepaws are capable of grasping tools, opening containers, etc. When semi-erect, a torthri moves at a reduced movement rate. To run, it must drop to all fours. A torthri can exert a magical Charm upon humans and humanoids by meeting their gaze and concentrating for one round. The saving throw against a torthri's charm is at a penalty of -2, and those charmed become the creature's willing slaves and worshippers. Whole villages have been known to come under the sway of a Torthri, constructing shrines in which to offer up food and treasure. Although charmed villagers will tell outsiders that their “spirit cat” is like an overgrown pet, no domestic cats will be found in the village, for the Torthri will slay or drive out all other felines.
If forced into combat, the Torthri can defend itself with claws and bite. However, the claws are weaker than those of its feline kin, and its hands are clumsy; it cannot use missile weapons or complex devices, although it can handle simple weapons such as the spear, staff, club, and axe. It may thus attack with a weapon and bite, and will do so if its true nature is discovered. The Torthri is intelligent enough to realise the value of magical weapons and shields, but cannot utter command words or wear armour. Any treasure possessed by a Torthri will be stored in a village shrine or hidden cave. There persist tales of Torthri speaking through their charmed slaves by telepathy, and of whole villages starving to feed their greedy idols. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Torthri: HD 2+3; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d2) and 1 bite (1d6) or 1 weapon (1d6) and 1 bite (1d6); Move 15 (6 when standing); Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Charm gaze.

TRAPPER BEAST
Trapper-beasts are manta-like creatures resembling the stone floors of the subterranean areas where they live.  When prey steps onto the trapper’s body, it whips up its wings to enfold and smother its victims (to a maximum of four).  Death occurs in 7 melee rounds.  Cold does not damage them, and fire inflicts only half damage.
Trapper Beast (10HD): HD 10; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 enfold; Move 1; Save 5; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Enfold and suffocate prey.
Trapper Beast (11HD): HD 11; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 enfold; Move 1; Save 4; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Enfold and suffocate prey.
Trapper Beast (12HD): HD 12; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 enfold; Move 1; Save 3; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Enfold and suffocate prey.

TREACHEROUS TREASURE
At first glance, a treacherous treasure appears to be an envious pile of riches. In reality, a treacherous treasure is a large, slime-like creature that exudes a sticky film from its pores. Throughout its life span, the slimy critter gathers up various coins, gems, and riches found within most dungeons. These objects stick to the slime's adhesive secretion, giving it the appearance of a pile of treasure. Once the slimy beast is slain, it will take 1d4 weeks for the adhesive film to lose its bonding properties. Only then may the adventurers claim the slime-beast's hoard.
A treacherous treasure that remains motionless may surprise its foes (40%). (Contributed by Skathros).
Treacherous Treasure: HD 7; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 slam (3d6); Move 6; Save 9; CL/XP 7/600; Special: surprises foes (40%).

TREANT
Treants are tree-like protectors and “shepherds” of forest trees.  Depending upon their size, they have different hit dice and damage; treants of 7 to 8 hit dice inflict 2d6 points of damage with each strike of their branch-like hands, treants of 9-10 hit dice inflict 3d6 points, and treants of 11-12 hit dice inflict 4d6 points.  All treants can “wake” trees within 60ft, allowing them to walk at a rate of 3, and possibly to attack (no more than two trees at a time can be awake at the behest of a single treant).
Treant (7HD): HD 7; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 strikes (2d6); Move 6; Save 9; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Control trees.
Treant (8HD): HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 strikes (2d6); Move 6; Save 8; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Control trees.
Treant (9HD): HD 9; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 strikes (3d6); Move 6; Save 6; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Control trees.
Treant (10HD): HD 10; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 strikes (3d6); Move 6; Save 5; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Control trees.
Treant (11HD): HD 11; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 strikes (4d6); Move 6; Save 4; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: Control trees.
Treant (12HD): HD 12; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 strikes (4d6); Move 6; Save 3; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: Control trees.

TREE GHOST
Tree ghosts are the undead form of a Dryad who was killed by a wraith, vampire, or other such undead creature. They are gaunt and emaciated ghostly horrors, with fingers ending in thorn-like claws, reeking of rotting plant matter. Vines of thorn and briar grow from a tree ghost's body, writhing around her like snakes. Tree ghosts are partially incorporeal, and are invisible until they attack. In close combat, a tree ghost uses her claws to tear at victims, but she can also hurl a spray of thorns from her serpentine thorn-vines to attack a single opponent at a distance of up to 60ft. Both the thorns and the tree ghost's claws carry a virulent sap; anyone hit by one of the tree ghost's attacks must make a saving throw or become ill with a strange delirium that drains away his willpower. The victim loses 1d4 points of charisma per hour, and once his charisma reaches 0 he becomes a servant of the Tree Ghost's will. He will follow her back to the Corpse Tree and begin sprouting runners and twigs, becoming absorbed into the Corpse Tree (the victim loses 1d4 constitution points per day, and upon reaching a constitution of 0 becomes part of the tree). The process is very painful and foul to look upon. If the Corpse Tree or the Tree Ghost is killed, anyone under the tree ghost's power who has not started the absorption process will regain lost charisma points at a rate of 1d4 per hour, and will suffer no other effects. Those that have already started to become absorbed into a corpse tree do not fare as well: all constitution loss is permanent, and cannot be reversed without the use of powerful magic. In addition to her poisonous claws and thorns, tree ghosts can exhale an Insect Plague (per the spell) once per day. They can also animate any wooden objects, plants, and other vegetation within 50ft; these animated things can attack and ensnare anyone in the area. Tree Ghosts are immune to normal weapons and can only be harmed by silver and magical weapons. Magic fire affects them, but ice, electricity, and acid have no effect, nor does normal fire. If a tree ghost is killed, but her corpse tree is not, the tree ghost will be reborn 24 hours after being killed.  (Contributed by Sean Stone).
Tree Ghost: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk: Claws (1d3) or thorns (0); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP: 10/1400; Special: Charisma drain, Insect Plague, animate wood, immune to normal weapons, cold, electricity, acid, and non-magical fire.

TRITON
Tritons are almost indistinguishable from mermen, but for their nobler appearance.  They are, however, a much more magical race entirely.  They are, for instance, almost entirely resistant to magic (90%).  Their leaders carry conch horns that summon giant sea horses and panic normal sea animals aiding enemies of the tritons.  Many triton leaders also have spell casting powers.
Triton: HD 3; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 trident (1d8+1); Move 1 (Swim 18); Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Magic resistance 90%.

TROGLODYTE
Troglodytes are subterranean reptile-people.  In battle, they emit a horrible smell that weakens most other races.  Failing a saving throw against the smell causes the victim to lose 1 point of strength per round for 1d6 rounds, with the loss persisting for another 10 rounds thereafter.  Troglodyte skin is slightly chameleon-like, which allows them to mount very effective ambushes.  Troglodytes despise the civilized races and seek to annihilate them, but different clans do not ordinarily work well together.  Troglodyte bands are often led by strong specimens, which can be 3 or 4 hit dice monsters.
Troglodyte: HD 2; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), Bite (1d4+1) or by weapon with shield (1d8); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Stench, chameleon skin.

TROLL
Trolls are as tall as ogres, and just as strong.  Unlike ogres, however, they attack with claws and teeth instead of weapons. Trolls regenerate, which is to say that any damage inflicted upon them heals within minutes (3 hit points per round).  The only way to utterly kill a troll is to submerse it in acid or burn it.  Trolls can even re-grow lopped-off heads and limbs.
Troll: HD 6+3; AC 4[15]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d8); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Regenerate 3hp/round.

TSALAKIAN
Tsalakians exist outside of normal space. It is said that they have no individual wills of their own, but are instead the fearful servitors of some greater malign power. They eternally scheme against, and are in turn defied by, another trans-dimensional race called the Kzaddich (q.v.). Tsalakians appear as tall men, completely enshrouded in cowled cloaks. Although capable of speaking with any sentient being (an innate form of tongues), their voices float bizarrely around them, as though through a ventriloquism spell with a random range and direction. They rarely allow their true forms to be seen, for they are difficult to comprehend. When uncloaked, they have been described as a blurry whirl of teeth forming a rough approximation of a man-like form. Tsalakians can bend and fold themselves through space, and are therefore extraordinarily difficult to successfully strike (thereby accounting for their high armor class). Moreover, they are fearsome in combat as they have the spell-like ability to blink at will. Their multiple attacks represent their ability to strike from several directions at once. A Tsalakian may divide its attacks among opponents within 20’ of itself. They may move any distance in any given round, ignoring physical or magic obstacles in their path. This functions as an innate form of teleport without error. They can even enter concealed or hidden areas, as they do not perceive space as others do, and can see “around” walls, floors and ceilings. Thus, they can disregard held portals, walls of force and the like. Secret, concealed and hidden doors and traps are always exposed to their weird senses, as are hidden people. Note that they are, however, subject to illusions and cannot perceive invisible, out of phase, ethereal or astral objects or creatures; nevertheless, they are virtually impossible to take by surprise. They are immune to “person” affecting spells, such as charm person. Tsalakians are allowed saving throws against all spells of any kind, take no damage from damage-causing spells on a successful saving throw, and take only half damage if they save successfully. They cannot be restrained by any impediment and act as if wearing rings of free action at all times. Tsalakians possess the mental power to detect good, evil, and magic at will, to cause fear (saving throw negates), and can sense the exact emotions of any being within 100ft. Tsalakians are usually found in the act of planning or carrying out some great ill, for they perpetually strive to bend all other sentient beings to the will of their dread master. They prefer to work through others, themselves remaining out of the fray if possible, revealing their fearsome abilities only if pressed. Their hatred of the Kzaddich knows no bounds and they will always attack these creatures on sight.
Tsalakian: HD 2+2; AC -4 [23]; Atk 4 weapon attacks (1d4); Move Infinite; Save 16; CL/XP: 7/600; Special: Incorporeal/teleport movement, perceive secret and hidden things, immune to spells affecting a "person," saving throw against all magic, reduced damage from spells, immune to restraint, detect good, magic and evil, sense emotions (empathy).

TUNNEL PRAWN
Tunnel prawns are scavengers resembling very large lobsters, with a hard, rocklike shell. These creatures wander through subterranean caverns eating bugs and fungi from the wall, floor, and ceiling. A tunnel prawn can scale walls and move along ceilings with no more difficulty than walking along a floor. These dungeon vermin are easily antagonized, and will attack any living beings venturing near. One tunnel prawn can provide the equivalent of a day’s rations. The meat is tough and very chewy, and keeps for only one day, but is actually quite delicious. Some taverns, usually those located near dungeon entrances, serve tunnel prawn as an item on the bill of fare, and will pay up to 3 gps for a fresh tunnel prawn. The prawns
weigh about 20 lbs each.  (Contributed by Matt Finch).
Tunnel Prawn: HD 1;AC 4[15]; Atk 2 pincers (1d2); Move 6; Save 17; CL/XP: 1/15; Special: Climbing

TURTLE, GIANT SEA
Giant sea turtles do not hunt humans, but they are aggressive in their territory, and are large enough to capsize small ships (15 foot diameter shell).  Obviously, the size and hit dice of individual specimens will vary; these stats are for an average adult turtle.
Turtle, Giant Sea: HD 15; AC 3[16] shell, 5[14] head/flippers; Atk 1 bite (4d6); Move 3 (Swim 12); Save 3; CL/XP 15/2900; Special: None.

TURTLE, GIANT SNAPPING
Giant snapping turtles are massive, having a shell with the same diameter in feet as the creature’s hit dice.  Their incredibly thick shells make them almost invulnerable to attacks that are not targeted at the head or limbs.
Turtle, Giant Snapping (8HD): HD 8; AC 2[17] shell, 5[14] head/limbs; Atk 1 bite (4d6); Move 4 (Swim 9); Save 8; CL/XP 8/800; Special: None.
Turtle, Giant Snapping (9HD): HD 9; AC 2[17] shell, 5[14] head/limbs; Atk 1 bite (4d6); Move 4 (Swim 9); Save 6; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: None.
Turtle, Giant Snapping (10HD): HD 10; AC 2[17] shell, 5[14] head/limbs; Atk 1 bite (4d6); Move 4 (Swim 9); Save 5; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: None.

UNICORN
Unicorns are generally shy and benevolent creatures, who will only allow a chaste maiden to approach them.  They can teleport once per day to a distance of 360ft, with a rider.  The unicorn’s horn has healing properties according to legend (the details of this, if any, are left to the GM).  There is considerable room to create variant sorts of unicorns: evil ones, flying ones, etc.
Unicorn: HD 5; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 hoofs (1d8), 1 horn (1d8); Move 24; Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: double damage for charge, 25% magic resistance, teleport

URRSLUMBER
By day, the urrslumber is a lurching heap of leafy vegetation, roughly in the shape of a headless bear, with tangled masses of thorny limb-vines extending from a twisted clump of pliable abdominal roots; when stationary, it is nearly indistinguishable from normal plant life. It hunts by ambush, sensing the vibrations of passersby and lunging forth to grapple with its thorny limbs. Its thorns secrete a sleep-inducing poison with effects that last for 1d6 hours, possibly less, depending on size and constitution of the victim. The urrslumber drags sleeping prey back to its lair (often within the root base of an enormous tree), binds the prey, and awaits nightfall. At sunset, the urrslumber transforms into a jet-black bear with red, sightless eyes. In this form, it hungrily devours the captured prey and then falls asleep, transforming back into plant form at sunrise. While in bear form, the urrslumber's gaze causes blindness for 1d6 rounds (saving throw negates). If it is killed while in plant form, the urrslumber regenerates completely from its remains (even burnt ashes) on the next new moon. Urrslumbers killed in bear form are permanently dead. (Contributed by Guy Fullerton).
Urrslumber: HD 5; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 grapple in plant form (1d6 + sleep poison), or 1 claw or bite in bear form (2d6); Move 9; Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Surprise opponents on a 1-4 in plant form, gaze attack (blindness) in bear form, and the bear form itself is blind.

URUAK (Scrap Gnolls)
Uruak, or "scrap gnolls" are a race of hyena-like humanoids from an alternate reality, similar to gnolls in appearance but much more intelligent. They are intelligent, civilised, and fanatically obsessed with mechanical devices and inventions. The culture of their world is equivalent to the Bronze Age. Scrap gnolls managed to survive magical cataclysms and inhospitable wastelands by combining their scavenging and tool-using skills. Although their world is now believed destroyed, they have somehow spread across the multiverse. Wherever they go, the landscape is littered with smashed sand ships, exploded steam engines, and rusting piles of scrap left behind their evolving technological skills.
Scrap gnolls spend most of their time creating and testing tools and devices, for they are instinctively gifted artificers. Many scrap gnolls are skilled in alchemy, clockwork, mining and smithing, and they may possess crude explosives (3d6 damage in 10’ radius, must be thrown, may have a timing device of up to 3 rounds) or arquebus-type ‘smoke-powder’ weapons (1d10 damage, backfire and be unusable until repaired on an attack roll of 1). Any weapons they make will be finely crafted and lovingly cared for. In a group of 6 or more scrap gnolls, there will be a leader with magic-user spells and the vision to direct the gnolls in working together towards a major task, as well as a pet snake or scorpion as their mascot. For every male actively inventing, scrounging, or repairing, there will be a female of close kin seeing to the more mundane domestic tasks. All scrap gnolls yearn to regain the expertise of building ornithopters and battle-automata. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr").
Uruak (Scrap Gnoll): HD 2; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d10); Move 12; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: May possess explosives or firearms.

VAMPIRE TREE (JUBOKKO)
The Jubokko grow on battlefields or other scenes of bloody carnage, where so much human blood may be shed on the ground that it is sucked up in great quantities by the roots of nearby trees. These trees grow up nourished by this blood, and knowing no other sustenance, they begin to thirst for the blood of human beings. They will await motionless, appearing as a normal tree, until some unsuspecting person passing beneath is snatched up by it’s branches and murdered, the trees then feast upon their victims blood. If the Jubokko hits with 2 of its branches against a single victim, that victim becomes immobilized and cannot fight or cast spells until freed by his companions. Such a victim becomes AC 9[10] for further attacks by the Jubokko.
Vampire Tree/Jubokko: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 4 branches (1d6); Move 0; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Immobilization.

VAMPIRE
Vampires are some of the most powerful of undead creatures.  They can only be hit with magic weapons, and when “killed” in this way they turn into gaseous form (per the spell), returning to their coffins.  They regenerate at a rate of 3 hit points per round, can turn into gaseous form or into a giant bat at will, and can summon a horde of bats or 3d6 wolves out from the night.  Looking into a vampire’s eyes necessitates a saving throw at –2, or the character is charmed (per a charm person spell).  Most terrifyingly, a vampire’s bite drains two levels from the victim.  Fortunately, vampires have some weaknesses.  They can be killed (these are the only known methods) by immersing them in running water, exposing them to sunlight, or driving a wooden stake through the heart.  They retreat from the smell of garlic, the sight of a mirror, or the sight of “good” holy symbols.  Any human killed by a vampire becomes a vampire under the control of its creator.  This description will be recognized easily as the “Dracula” type of vampire.  Many other possibilities for vampires exist in folklore: Chinese vampires, for instance, and more blood-drinkers more feral than intelligent. Plus, other cultural templates with different attributes could be created – what about an ancient Egyptian mummified vampire, or an Aztec vampire?
Vampire (7HD): HD 7; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 bite (1d10 + level drain); Move 12 (Fly 18); Save 9; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: See description.
Vampire (8HD): HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 bite (1d10 + level drain); Move 12 (Fly 18); Save 8; CL/XP 11/1700; Special: See description.
Vampire (9HD): HD 9; AC 2[17]; Atk 1 bite (1d10 + level drain); Move 12 (Fly 18); Save 6; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: See description.

VAPOR CRANE
Vapor Cranes make their homes where geysers spews and hot springs make great boiling pools, arranging their rock nests so that they fill with boiling water. Strangely, they do not eat, but draw their sustenance from the steaming waters they inhabit. They will attempt to fly away if they are endangered but they will fight to the death if cornered.

Touching a Vapor Crane without the proper precautions can be deadly, for their bodies are boiling hot (1d6+1 hp/hit die). They are also able to spew clouds of steam from their nostrils as both an offensive and a defensive measure and will use this ability to flee, unless guarding a nest. The steam cloud can be used in one of two ways (3 times per day total): if the crane is attacking, it blows the steam in a cone 30ft long to a width of 30ft, inflicting 1d6 + 1/ hit die. When used defensively, the crane surrounds itself with the cloud in a radius of 15ft, which not only inflicts damage but also obscures the bird from sight. In normal combat, a vapor crane attacks with its beak, which is filled with needle-sharp teeth.  (Contributed by Russell Cone).
Vapor Crane (Large Adult): HD 5; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d4+5); Move 5 (Fly 12); Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Scalding to touch, steam cloud (1d6+1/ hit die) in cone or 15ft radius.
Vapor Crane (Small Adult): HD 2; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d4+2); Move 5 (Fly 12); Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Scalding to touch, steam cloud (1d6+1/ hit die) in cone or 15ft radius.
Vapor Crane (Fledgling): HD 1; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (1d4+1); Move 5 (Fly 6); Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Scalding to touch, steam cloud (1d6+1/ hit die) in cone or 15ft radius.

VARGOUILLE
Vargouilles are demonic creatures, a horrid head, bearded with small, writhing tentacles, with bat wings protruding from the back.  Their bite is deadly, causing permanent hit point loss (saving throw).
Vargouille: HD 1; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 bite (1d4); Move 0 (Fly 12); Save 17; CL/XP 4/120; Special: permanent hit point loss.

VIERD
Vierds are creepy, two-headed cousins to ghouls, standing only 3ft tall. They are nocturnal albinos with pink eyes, yellow claws and dirty fangs. Like their kin, they are immune to charm and sleep spells. A vierd has a paralyzing touch on a failed save (2d6 turns), and if bitten, the victim must make a saving throw or contract a disease. The diseased spot must be purified (burning, amputation, holy water, etc.) in order to arrest the spread of the disease.  (Contributed by Oldcrawler).
Vierd: HD 2+4; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d3), 2 bites (1d4); Move 9; Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Paralysis, disease, immunities.

WALKING SLIME
These vaguely humanoid monsters slop their way through underground passages in search of living flesh to "eat." They attack by smacking prey with their large oozing fists, attempting to cover them and turn them into living slimes as well (on a natural roll of 15+, the victim must make a saving throw or begin transforming into a walking slime). Walking slimes are harmed only by fire or extreme cold, but can be harmed by normal weapons. (Contributed by Random).
Walking Slime: HD 2; AC 9[11]; Atk 1 (1d6 + turn to slime); Move 6; Save 16; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Transform to slime.

WANDERING HOLE
A wandering hole is a creature that exists in a different dimension but extends into the normal world as a living emptiness, a hole in space. In its expanded form, it resembles a 10ft x 10ft hole running 20ft to 50ft deep (1d4+1 x10). The creature possesses the capacity to constrict its anti-mass to a 1/4 inch square. Contracting itself from a 10ft x 10ft square to a 1/4in x 1/4in square takes 1d4+1 rounds. Expanding its form back to 10ft x 10ft takes only 1 round.  The most common tactic used by wandering holes is to constrict themselves to their smallest size, then, as an adventurer walks above, the wandering hole expands, sending the victim plummeting down its depth. The wandering hole then compresses itself anew to crush the hapless victim. Victims of this tactic always run the risk of being surprised (50%).
Victims who find themselves within the depths of a wandering hole have but 1d4+1 rounds to get themselves out before the contracting critter crushes them: on the last round, the constricting wandering hole crushes the victim to death.
Wandering holes may be damaged, but only by spells or magic weapons and items. When it dies, a wandering hole returns to its expanded size of 10ft x 10ft, but as a normal, nonliving hole in the ground.
Wandering Hole: HD 5; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 special; Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Surprise, Constrict.

WASP, GIANT
Giant wasps are as large as humans, and are incredibly aggressive.  Their sting paralyzes (saving throw) for 1d4+1 days (at the end of which time, wasp larvae eat the victim from the inside out).  Cure disease will kill the larvae.  The wasp wings are paper-thin, and flammable.
Wasp, Giant: HD 4; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 sting (1d4 + poison), 1 bite (1d8); Move 1 (Fly 20); Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Paralyzing poison, larvae.

WEASEL, GIANT
These ferocious predators are often found in dungeon complexes, for they lair in caves.  When a giant weasel hits an opponent, it clamps its jaws and sucks blood, automatically inflicting 2d6 points of damage per round.  Giant weasels can be trained as guard animals; although they cannot be trained to warn of intruders, they are far more deadly than guard dogs.  Their pelts sell for 1d6x100gp each.
Weasel, Giant: HD 3+3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (2d6 + blood drain); Move 15; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Drain blood.

WHALE, KILLER
Killer whales might be found as the allies of any intelligent underwater species, chaotic or lawful, good or evil.  Some killer whales are as intelligent as humans, others are not.
Whale, Killer : HD 12; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (3d10); Move (Swim 24); Save 3; CL/XP 12/2000; Special: None.

WHALE, SPERM
Sperm whales can swallow small ships whole, and automatically swallow whole any human-sized prey they hit with an attack.  Blows from their tails destroy boats and might also destroy ships, or damage them terribly.  Some sperm whales are intelligent (and often malevolent).
Whale, Sperm: HD 36; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (4d10), 1 tail (4d10); Move (Swim 18); Save 3; CL/XP 37/7400; Special: Swallow whole.

WIGHT
Wights live in tombs, graveyards, and burial mounds (barrows).  They are undead, and thus not affected by sleep or charm spells.  Wights are immune to all non-magical weapons, with the exception of silver weapons.  Any human killed or completely drained of levels by a wight becomes a wight.
Wight: HD 3; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 claw (1hp + level drain); Move 9; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Drain 1 level with hit, hit only by magic or silver weapons.

WILL-O-THE-WISP
Will o’ the wisps are phantom-like shapes of eerie light, creatures that live in dangerous places and try to lure travelers into quicksand, off the edges of cliffs, etc.  They usually inhabit swamps or high moors.  They can brighten or dim their own luminescence, and change their shapes as well, to appear as a group of lights, a wisp of light, or in the glowing wraithlike shape of a human (often female).  They will generally depart if the attempt to lead victims into danger fails, but if they are attacked they can defend themselves with violent shocks of lightning-like power.  These creatures are intelligent, and can be forced to reveal the location of their treasure hoards.
Will-o-the-wisp: HD 9; AC –8[27]; Atk 1 shock (2d6); Move 18; Save 6; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: None.

WOLF
Wolves are pack hunters, and may be found in large numbers.  Male wolves weigh from 80 to 100 pounds.
Wolf: HD 2+2; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 bite (1d4+1); Move 18; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

WOLF, WINTER
Winter wolves are as intelligent as humans, and many packs or their leaders are not friendly to humankind.  Some, indeed, are actively malevolent and hostile, hunting humans as prey and stalking arctic villages for lone victims.  Winter wolves can breathe frost at a range of 10ft, blasting anything in front of them in a wide area for 4d6 points of damage (save for half).  This ability can only be used once per turn (10 rounds).  Winter wolf pelts are very valuable (1d4+2 x1000gp).
Wolf, Winter: HD 5; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+1); Move 18; Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Breathe frost (1/turn).

WOLF, WORG
Worgs are large, intelligent, and evil wolves.  They may have supernatural origins or be the flesh-form of evil spirits.
Wolf, Worg: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+1); Move 18; Save 13; CL/XP 4/120; Special: None.

WOLVERINES
Wolverines are vicious and tough, living in arctic and tundra (taiga) regions of the world.  Its musk is not dangerous, but the smell remains for days, and it spoils food. They attack with a +4 to-hit bonus for their ferocity.
Wolverine: HD 3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite/claw (1d6+3); Move 12; Save 14; CL/XP 4/120; Special: Musk, +4 to hit bonus.

WOLVERINES, GIANT
Giant wolverines are larger than their normal cousins, and some of them may be possessed of a malign intelligence.  They attack with a +4 to-hit bonus for their ferocity.
Giant Wolverine: HD 6; AC 5[14]; Atk 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d6); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Musk, +4 to hit.

WRAITH
Wraiths are powerful wights, immune to all non-magical weapons other than silver ones (which inflict only half damage).  Arrows are particularly ineffective against them, for even magical and silver arrows inflict only one hit point of damage per hit.  Wraiths can be found riding well-trained battle steeds or more unusual mounts that will tolerate their presence.
Wraith: HD 4; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 touch (1d6+ level drain); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: drain 1 level with hit.

WYVERN
A wyvern is the two-legged form of dragon; but these creatures are smaller and less intelligent than true four-legged dragons, not to mention that they do not have a breath weapon.  Wyverns have a poisonous sting at the end of their tails, but they are not coordinated enough to attack with both bite and sting in a single round.  In any given round, the wyvern is 60% likely to use its tail, which can lash out to the creature’s front even farther than its head can reach.
Wyvern: HD 8; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 bite (2d8) or 1 sting (1d6); Move 6 (Fly 24); Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: poison sting, flies.

XORN
Xorn are bizarre creatures, originally from the elemental planes of earth, which eat precious metals and other minerals. They have a rock-like consistency, granting an extremely good armor class, and appear to be made of stone. Xorn have a barrel-shaped body, radially symmetrical with three eyes, three arms, three stubby legs, and a powerful mouth set in the top of the creature’s body. The stone-like appearance grants the xorn a tremendously good chance of surprising its enemies.
These creatures are immune to fire and cold damage, and take only half damage from electrical attacks (no damage when saving throws are successful). A xorn can swim through stone, but requires a full melee round to enter solid rock, during which time it cannot attack. Phase Door spells will utterly destroy a xorn that is traveling through rock or readjusting its composition.
Xorn are particularly vulnerable to spells that affect earth and stone. Move Earth spells may be used to hurl a xorn backwards 30ft and stun them for a full round. Stone to flesh and rock to mud spells weaken the xorn’s elemental structure, increasing the creature’s AC to 8 until the xorn concentrates for a full round to readjust its composition. Passwall spells inflict 1d10+10 points of damage with no saving throw.
Xorn: HD 7; AC –2[21]; Atk 3 claws (1d3), 1 bite (4d6); Move 9; Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Immune to fire and cold, half damage from electricity, travel through stone.

YARUGA
Named after their distinctive call, Yaruga are agile, hammerheaded lizards, 10ft in height, which walk on two long bird-like legs. Yaruga graze on plants and grasses by day, but become vicious hunters by night. During the day Yaruga are skittish and scare easily. They excrete a foul-smelling gas if approached within 50 ft, then run away; the gas blinds anyone within 10ft of the Yaruga for 1d4 rounds (saving throw applies). At night, Yaruga become extremely dangerous and aggressive, chasing their prey down and kicking them to death before feasting on them. When they make the initial charge, a yaruga's running kick inflicts double damage on a successful hit. Anyone sprayed by Yaruga-gas during the day becomes the main target of the savage lizards by night. In the wild, Yaruga are usually encountered in pairs, day or night, but there may be 2d4 together during mating season. (Contributed by Sean Wills).
Yaruga: HD 3; AC 5 [14]; Atk 1 kick (1d6); Move 18; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Blinding flatulence, running kick.

YETI
Yetis are the “Bigfoot” of the arctic and the high mountains.  If a yeti strikes the same opponent with both fists, it bear-hugs for an additional 2d6 points of damage.  Anyone caught in the yeti’s arms like this must make a saving throw or be paralyzed with fear for 1d3 rounds (during which time the yeti hits automatically).  Yetis are very intelligent, and can be quite malevolent.  They are immune to magical cold.
Yeti: HD 5; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 fists (1d6); Move 14; Save 12; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Immune to cold, hug, fear.

YGG (Gallows Tree)
Ygg (commonly called 'Gallows Trees') are ancient, tree-like predators that impale both beast and man on the thorn-covered bark of their snaking branches.  An Ygg’s branches can whip out to a distance of 30ft to seize prey, who must make a successful saving throw to avoid being caught (the Ygg can use 1d6 of these branches in any given combat round). Once impaled upon the massive thorns, the life force and nutrients of the victim is drained at the rate of 1 hit point per round, leaving the empty husks to slough off in the fullness of time. Any man-sized creature has a 1 in 6 chance per round of pulling free of the branch. Reeking of putrefaction and festooned with corpses, Ygg roam the countryside in search of flesh, producing a cloud of spores (60ft radius) that draws creatures to them. Prey within the sporecloud must make a saving throw (each round) or be drawn closer to the Ygg. Once the Ygg attacks, these victims come to their senses, but it may be too late. Ygg have no visual organs but can detect any creatures within 60ft using sound, scent, and vibration. They are immune to cold, but are susceptible to fire (+1 damage per hit die). Folklore suggests that the peach-like fruit Ygg produce has magical life-enhancing properties.  (Contributed by Sean Wills).
Gallows Tree: HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk Impale (d6+1); Move 6; Save 8; CL/XP 10/1400; Special: Immune to cold, spore cloud.

YIENHOOL
Yienhools are pale humanoids with long, thin arms and elongated, clawed hands. Their bulging, white eyes are well adapted to dim light, but they are virtually blind in sunlight and never emerge from below ground unless forced to do so. They are deep-dwellers of the underground, but small groups of them are occasionally found in the upper reaches of the subterranean world. Yienhools are more intelligent than animals, but barely so - they can communicate and follow orders, and in packs they can hunt with considerable cunning, but their ability to act independently of a pack or a strong leader is very weak. Yienhool packs swarm their prey, the first ranks grabbing, clutching, and immobilizing to allow their total numbers to swarm over the foe and bring them down. If a yienhool hits, it has grabbed successfully at one of the foe's arms, rendering weapon or shield unusable as the yienhool clings on, regardless of danger (such attacks are made at -1 to hit). While holding on, the yienhool can make more attempts to grab the other arm as well. Yienhool can swarm over the backs of their fighting brethren to climb past front ranks and into the rear ranks of their opponents. If a yienhool is not already holding an enemy, and chooses not to make grabbing attacks, it can attack with its claws. These creatures are usually encountered in large numbers, for they do not divide into packs of fewer than 6.
Yienhool: HD 1d6; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 claw (1d4); Move 9; Save 18; CL/XP 1/15; Special: grab and pin arms, swarm over the top of battle lines.

YITH, HOUND OF
Hounds of Yith are supernatural creatures of the night, resembling large dogs (most say).  They are, perhaps, originally denizens of another plane of existence, and they are summoned to the hunt by powerful and malign beings.  The baying of the hounds causes fear within 100ft (per the spell).  Normal weapons do not damage the hounds of Yith: silver weapons inflict only 1hp damage per hit, and magical weapons inflict 1hp per point of to-hit bonus.  The hounds have 10% resistance to magic.
Hound of Yith: HD 3; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 bite (1d6+1); Move 18 (Fly 25); Save 14; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Baying, harmed only by magic/silver weapons, fly, magic resistance 10%.

YURMP (Toad Robber)
Fat and ugly toad-like humanoids, the Yurmp are bandits and scroungers. Though of fine material, such as silk, their clothes are torn and soiled. Any armour is mismatched and poorly maintained, held together by rusty buckles and double-wrapped cords. Yurmp have sour expressions and grumpy attitudes, often becoming impatient and bored while waiting beside a road or path for someone to ambush. Their weapons are generally polearms looted from battle sites. If yurmp are able to coordinate an ambush, they have an increased chance of surprising their opponents (1-3 on 1d6). In villages that tolerate their presence they are usually part of any organised crime; in areas where they are not tolerated, yurmp live by “finding” dropped items and digging through the garbage of other races, bemoaning their poor luck all the while.
For every 5 yurmp in a group there is a cumulative 2 in 6 chance that a wrestler yurmp will be present. These grossly fat yurmps disdain weapons and armour, and strike for 1d6 damage in unarmed combat. If the unarmed attack succeeds by four or more points, the wrestler has a firm hold on the foe and can throw him to the ground, disarm him, prevent attacks, or inflict continuous strangling damage (1d6 per round). Wrestler yurmps have an effective Strength score of 18, and usually enjoy challenging humans to arm wrestling contests. The rest of the yurmp enjoy gambling on these contests. If yurmp are able to attack by stealth or surprise from behind, they gain +4 on the attack and inflict double normal damage. (Contributed by Scott Wylie Roberts, "Myrystyr"). (Compare to similar monster: Thugtoad).
Yurmp: HD 5+3; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 polearm (1d8); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 5/240; Special: Backstab.
Yurmp, Wrestler: HD 5+3; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 unarmed (1d6); Move 12; Save 12; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Backstab, unarmed grapple with hit 4+ over number needed.

##ZETAN
##Zetans are a grey skinned collective-intelligence race originally hailing from somewhere beyond the material plane. Workers are about four feet tall, and leaders are as tall as six feet. All zetans have thin arms and legs, oversized heads and eyes, and extremely long fingers. They are encountered most frequently on the Ethereal and Astral planes. Their purpose in visiting the Material Plane is a mystery, although they have been known to abduct mortals or livestock, sometimes in broad daylight. Zetans have an aura which causes Fear (as per the spell, saving throw negates), and they are immune to non-magical weapons. It is believed that Zetans are not truly evil, but merely inscrutable and totally alien in motivation; individuals that have met the Zetans will have wildly different stories to tell about them. Smaller Zetans seem to function most often as workers; the taller leader-types are conjectured to have more independence, but still serve the collective. Zetans travel in a thought conveyance which is only temporarily physical, glows various unearthly colors, and is able to become invisible (by entering the Ethereal Plane) at will. For every fifteen Zetans there will always be at least one leader type. A leader must be present for transport of any mortals or livestock. If a Zetan is killed on the prime material plane it is dispatched back to the collective unless its leader is killed as well, in which case it is dispersed. More permanent Zetan fortresses may exist under some of the more inaccessible desert areas of the world; nomads speak of the sound of great machines beneath the sands.
##Zetan, Worker: HD 1; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 Weapon (1d4); Move 6; Save 17; CL/XP 3/60 Special: +1 or better weapon to hit, Fear aura.
##Zetan, Leader: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk Weapon (1d8); Move 9; Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: +1 or better weapon to hit, Fear aura, Ethereal Travel.

ZOMBIE
Zombies are mindless creatures, the walking dead.  These are merely animated corpses, not carriers of any sort of undead contagion as ghouls are.  If their Undeath is contagious, they should be worth a few more experience points than described here, and if a single hit from a zombie causes contagion or any other sort of disease they should be worth considerably more experience.  However, the standard zombie is simply a corpse animated to do its creator’s bidding.
Zombie: HD 2; AC 8[11] or with shield 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon or strike (1d8); Move 6; Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: Immune to sleep and charm.

ZOMBIE, BRAIN-EATING
Brain-eaters are a rare variety of zombie, appearing as bloated, swollen-headed walking corpses. They hunger for the brains of intelligent creatures, especially those with the ability to cast spells. Brain-eaters are capable of absorbing the energy of magical spells cast near them, negating any effect they might have had. A brain-eater may absorb up to 2d4 spell levels, its head growing ever larger during the process. When its capacity is reached, the brain-eater's head violently explodes. A brain-eater regains the ability to absorb an additional spell level with each fresh brain it eats. (Contributed by Random).
Zombie, Brain-eating: HD 3; AC 8 [11], Attacks: 1 strike (1d8), Move: 6, Save 14; CL/XP 5/240; Special: absorbs spells.

ZOMBIE, LEPER
Leper zombies are clearly undead, afflicted with a horrific disease resembling a form of leprosy, more agile than other types of zombies, and far more deadly: any who battle them must save vs disease at the end of the fight or contract Zombie Leprosy (die in 3 days and return as a Leper Zombie). Leper zombies may be turned by clerics as ghouls, and they are immune to sleep and charm spells. Anyone slain by a Leper Zombie reanimates as a leper zombie in 1d6 rounds.  Carrying equipment, arms or armor of one slain by a leper zombie or used to destroy a leper zombie carries a risk to the bearer, they must save vs disease at +4 each day or contract Zombie Leprosy. Holy water, remove curse and other methods of cleansing may render the gear safe again. (Contributed by JD Jarvis).
Zombie, Leper: HD 1; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 claw or bite (1d6); Move 9; Save 17; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Disease, those slain animate as leper zombies

ZOMBIE, PYRE
These undead creatures are weirdly enchanted with some sort of necromancy. When hit by a melee weapon, they burst violently into flame, inflicting 1d6 points of damage to anyone within 5ft. Only the bones remain after this conflagration: the remaining skeleton fights as a skeleton rather than as a zombie (including the lower hit points). The flesh re-grows rapidly, and the creature will fight as a zombie again in 10 combat rounds, including the restored ability to immolate itself. (Contributed by Scott Casper).
Zombie, Pyre: HD 2; AC 8[11] or with shield 7[12]; Atk 1 weapon or strike (1d8); Move 6; Save 16; CL/XP 3/60; Special: Immune to sleep and charm, immolation.

ZOMBIE RAVEN
Zombie Ravens are the rotting, undead bodies of ravens.
Raven, Zombie: HD 1d6hp; AC 8[11]; Atk 1 bite (1d3); Move 1 (Fly 6); Save 18; CL/XP B/10; Special: Immune to sleep and cold.

##Resource Tables
##
##It was a difficult decision whether or not to include any wilderness encounter
##tables or terrain-type breakdown of monsters in this book, because this sort of
##world-specific detail can feel restrictive, especially if it’s included in the
##monster’s actual description.  However, this sort of table is also a very
##useful tool for allowing the referee to organize his thoughts around a large
##number of monsters, and if you’re playing a “sandbox” type game where the
##players may roam their characters all over the place, random tables can be a
##real necessity for handling that sort of thing on a moment’s notice.
##
##The first set of tables is one possible arrangement of monsters by the terrain
##types in which they might be encountered.  Each terrain type has a basic table,
##showing a relatively intuitive set of monsters that might live in that climate.
##The second table, labeled “Weirder,” contains the book’s more unusual monsters,
##or monsters that could be placed into the terrain/climate if they were slightly
##modified.  The “weirder” table is a good tool for referees who want to avoid
##too normal a feel in outdoor adventuring.
##
##The second set of tables are random encounter tables using 3d6 to determine the
##nature of the encounter.  The random encounter tables do not cover all the
##monsters identified as being found in that terrain type; there is plenty of
##scope for referees to design their own tables using different monsters.
##
##Here goes.
##
##Aquatic, Basic Table
##Aboleth (CL 12)
##Aqueous Orb (CL 5)
##Barracuda (CL 1)
##Cliessid (CL A)
##Crabmen (CL 3)
##Crocodile, Giant (CL 6)
##Crocodile, Normal (CL 3)
##Darakel (CL 11)
##Dinosaur, Elasmosaurus (CL 15)
##Dragon Turtle (CL 13)
##Dolphin (CL 2)
##Eel, giant electric (CL 4)
##Eel, giant moray (CL 4)
##Elemental, Water (CL 8, 12, 16)
##Ghast (CL 5)
##Ghoul (CL 3)
##Giant Crab (CL 3)
##Giant, Storm (CL 16)
##Gillmonkey (CL B)
##Hag, Sea (CL 5)
##Hippocampus (CL 4)
##Lamprey, giant (CL 5)
##Leech, giant (CL 2-7)
##Lizardman (CL 2)
##Merman (CL 1)
##Naga, water (CL 10)
##Nixie (CL 1)
##Nymph (CL 5)
##Octopus, Giant (CL 10)
##Oktomon (CL 4)
##Ray, Giant Manta (CL 10)
##Ray, Sting (CL 3)
##Reef Walker (CL 8)
##Rusalka (CL 8)
##Sahuagin (CL 2)
##Sea Cats (CL 5)
##Sea Horse (CL 3-4)
##Sea Lion (CL 3)
##Shark, Medium (CL 5-6)
##Shark, Small (CL 3-4)
##Snake, Giant Amphisbaena (CL 7)
##Snake, Giant Constrictor (CL 7)
##Snake, Giant Viper (CL 6)
##Whale, Killer (CL 12)
##Whale, Sperm (CL 37)
##
##Aquatic, Weirder Subtable
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Centipede, giant (Man-sized) (CL 4)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Lethal) (CL 2)
##Coral Clamper (CL 8)
##Crabnipede (CL 5)
##Dertesha (CL 9)
##Exoskeleton, giant (crab) (CL 8)
##Gargoyle, aquatic (CL 6)
##Gelatinous Cube (CL 5)
##Golem, Stone (CL 16)
##Grick (CL 4)
##Hydra (CL 7-15)
##Lephane (CL 8)
##Mimic (CL 8)
##Sea Serpent (CL 30)
##Shark, Giant (CL 13)
##Shark, Large (CL 7-8)
##Shrangaathi (CL B)
##Squid, Giant (CL 14)
##Titan (CL 17-22)
##Triton (CL 4)
##Turtles, Giant Sea (CL 15)
##Turtles, Giant Snapping (CL 8-10)
##
##
##Arctic, Basic Table
##Air Gusts (CL 4)
##Bear, Polar (CL 7)
##Dragon, White (CL varies)
##Ettin (CL 10)
##Giant, Frost (CL 11)
##Giant, Storm (CL 16)
##Human, Berserkers (CL 2)
##Linnorm (CL 10)
##Lycanthrope, Werebear (CL 8)
##Lynx, Giant (CL 2)
##Mammoth (CL 13)
##Owl, Giant (CL 5)
##Remorhaz (CL 10-15)
##Rhinoceros, Wooly (CL 10)
##Stag, Giant (CL 4)
##Tiger, Sabre-Tooth (CL 8)
##Wolverines (CL 4)
##Wolves (CL 2)
##Yeti (CL 7)
##
##Arctic, Weirder Subtable
##Allip (CL 7)
##Centaur (CL 5)
##Chalkeions (CL 5-11)
##Clawed Fiend (CL 3)
##Deasic (CL 10)
##Draug (CL 3)
##Fox monk (CL 3)
##Ghast (CL 5)
##Ghoul (CL 3)
##Glurm (CL 4)
##Gnoll (CL 2)
##Goblins (CL B)
##Golem, flesh (CL 12)
##Headless Hound (CL 7)
##Hounds of Chronos (CL 5)
##Lycanthrope, wereweasel (CL 5)
##Lycanthrope, werewolf (CL 5)
##Malformians (CL 1)
##Melhukiskata (CL 4)
##Minotaur (CL 6)
##Oblivion Wraith (CL 14)
##Ogre (CL 4)
##Owlbear (CL 5)
##Silent Knight (CL 8)
##Sorcerer Ox (CL 7)
##Tatzelworm (CL 3)
##Titan (CL 17-22)
##Toad, Giant Ice (CL 6)
##Vampire (CL 10-12)
##Wight (CL 5)
##Will-o-Wisp (CL 10)
##Wolverines, Giant (CL 7)
##Wolves, Winter (CL 6)
##Wolves, Worg (CL 4)
##Wraith (CL 6)
##Wyvern (CL 10)
##Yith, hounds of (CL 7)
##Zombie, Raven (CL B)
##
##Desert, Basic Table
##Air Gusts (CL 4)
##Androsphinx (CL 15)
##Ant, giant (CL 2, 4, 8)
##Beetle, Giant (CL 4)
##Camel (CL 2)
##Centipede Swarm (CL 1)
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Centipede, giant (Man-sized) (CL 4)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Lethal) (CL 2)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Nonlethal) (CL 1)
##Criosphinx (CL 10)
##Djinni (CL 9)
##Dragonne (CL 10)
##Eagle, giant (CL 4)
##Efreeti (CL 12)
##Elemental, Air (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Fire (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Ghoul (CL 3)
##Goblins, Oni-Aka (CL 1)
##Gorgon (CL 10)
##Gravebird (CL 3)
##Gynosphinx (CL 9)
##Hieracosphinx (CL 9)
##Human, bandits (CL 1)
##Human, patrol (CL 1)
##Igniguana (CL 6)
##Lamia (CL 12)
##Lizard, giant (CL 3)
##Ophidian (CL 5 or 3)
##Sand Screamer (CL 2)
##Shocker Lizard (CL 2)
##Snake, Cobra (CL 3)
##Snake, Giant Amphisbaena (CL 7)
##Snake, Giant Spitting (CL 6)
##Snake, Giant Viper (CL 6)
##Snake, Viper (CL 2)
##Spider, Giant (1 ft. diameter) (CL 3)
##Spider, Giant (4 ft. diameter) (CL 5)
##Wyvern (CL 10)
##
##Desert, Weirder Subtable
##Allip (CL 7)
##Azer (CL 2)
##Basilisk, Desert (CL 6)
##Beetle, giant fire (CL 1)
##Carrion Fly (CL 7)
##Centaur (CL 5)
##Chalkeions (CL 5-11)
##Exoskeleton (giant ant) (CL 2)
##Exoskeleton (giant beetle) (CL 5)
##Formian male (CL 9)
##Formian taskmaster (CL 8)
##Formian warrior (CL 5)
##Formian worker (CL 1)
##Fungi, violet (CL 4)
##Ghast (CL 5)
##Ghoul, Ao-nyobo (blue wife) (CL 6)
##Goblins (CL B)
##Golem, Clay (CL 14)
##Golem, Stone (CL 16)
##Headless Hound (CL 7)
##Hounds of Chronos (CL 5)
##Human, berserkers (CL 2)
##Leucrota (CL 6)
##Lizard, lightning (CL 7)
##Malcarna (CL 8)
##Malformians (CL 1)
##Maun-Ge (CL 3)
##Oblivion Wraith (CL 14)
##Omgoth (CL 5)
##Owl, Giant (CL 5)
##Ragged Craw (CL 3)
##Scorpion, Giant (CL 8)
##Spider, Giant (6 ft. diameter) (CL 7)
##Stirges (CL 1)
##Sycorex (CL 7)
##Tiger, Sabre-Tooth (CL 8)
##Vampire (CL 10-12)
##Vargouille (CL 4)
##Wasps, Giant (CL 6)
##Wight (CL 5)
##Yaruga (CL 3)
##Zetan (CL 3, 5)
##Zombie, Pyre (CL 3)
##
##
##Dimensions, Basic Table
##Air Gusts (CL 4)
##Arcanix (CL 4, 8, 14)
##Athatch (CL 15)
##Azer (CL 2)
##Chalkeions (CL 5-11)
##Chaos Knight (CL 14)
##Chimera (CL 11)
##Cloud Giant (CL 13)
##Demon, Achaierai (CL 8)
##Demon, Baalroch (CL 13)
##Demon, Dretch (CL 6)
##Demon, Erinyes (CL 9)
##Demon, Glabrezu (CL 11)
##Demon, Grimlek (CL 7)
##Demon, Hezrou (CL 11)
##Demon, Lemures (CL 4)
##Demon, Manes (CL 2)
##Demon, Marilith (CL 13)
##Demon, Nalfeshnee (CL 13)
##Demon, Quasit (CL 7)
##Demon, Vrock (CL 9)
##Djinni (CL 9)
##Efreeti (CL 12)
##Elemental, Air (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Earth (CL 8, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Fire (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Water (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Ethereal Shade (CL 10)
##Formian male (CL 9)
##Formian taskmaster (CL 8)
##Formian warrior (CL 5)
##Formian worker (CL 1)
##Frog, giant killer (CL 2)
##Froglum (CL 8)
##Fungi, violet (CL 4)
##Gargoyle (CL 6)
##Gargoyle, Maggog (CL 7)
##Gelatinous Cube (CL 5)
##Ghast (CL 5)
##Giant Phase Spider (CL 6)
##Giant, Storm (CL 16)
##Gibbering Mouther (CL 6)
##Glass Butterfly (CL A)
##Goblins, Oni-Aka (CL 1)
##Goblins, Redcap (CL 1)
##Golem, Clay (CL 14)
##Golem, Iron (CL 18)
##Grey Ooze (CL 5)
##Grick (CL 4)
##Hell Hound (CL 5-8)
##Hounds of Chronos (CL 5)
##Imp (CL 6)
##Invisible Stalker (CL 9)
##Malcarna (CL 8)
##Mind Eater (CL 12)
##Mothdog (CL 2)
##Night Hag (CL 11)
##Nightmare (CL 10)
##Oblivion Wraith (CL 14)
##Shadow (CL 4)
##Shadow Mastiff (CL 5)
##Sorcery Leech (CL 1)
##Stoneflower (CL 5)
##Thelidu (CL 8)
##Vargouille (CL 4)
##Wight (CL 5)
##Wraith (CL 6)
##Xorn (CL 8)
##Yith, hounds of (CL 7)
##Zetan (CL 5)
##
##Dimensions, Weirder Subtable
##Amphorons of Yothri (CL 4, 8, 13)
##Artificer of Yothri (CL 14)
##Beetle, Giant Arcane (CL 7)
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Clawed Fiend (CL 3)
##Couatl (CL 11)
##Crystal Growth (CL 5)
##Crystaline (CL 5)
##Fox monk (CL 3)
##Furious fountain (CL 18)
##Glitterskull (CL 13)
##Glurm (CL 4)
##Goblins, Belfry (CL 3)
##Great Lantern Worm (CL 30)
##Grue (CL 10 or 11)
##Hawktoad (CL 3)
##Igniguana (CL 6)
##Leaping Maw (CL 2)
##Lich (CL 15-21)
##Marrosian Statue (CL 5)
##Clockwork, Giant Robot (CL 19)
##Melgara (CL 5)
##Mimic (CL 8)
##Mothmere (CL 11)
##Oculaktis (CL 10)
##Origami Warrior (CL 2)
##Retriever (CL 12)
##Rothran (CL 7)
##Salamander (CL 8)
##Shocker Lizard (CL 2)
##Silent Knight (CL 8)
##Sorcerer Ox (CL 7)
##Titan (CL 19-24)
##Tsalakian (CL 7)
##Vierd (CL 4)
##Wandering Hole (CL 7)
##Will-o-Wisp (CL 10)
##
##Dungeon, Basic Table
##Aboleth (CL 12)
##Air Gusts (CL 4)
##Allip (CL 7)
##Animated Objects (CL 1+)
##Ant, giant (CL 2, 4, 8)
##Aranea (CL 7)
##Athatch (CL 15)
##Azer (CL 2)
##Badger, Giant (CL 3)
##Basilisk (CL 8)
##Beetle, Giant (CL 4)
##Beetle, Giant Arcane (CL 7)
##Beetle, Giant Fire (CL 1)
##Black Hunter (CL 3)
##Black Pudding (CL 11)
##Bugbear (CL 3)
##Cave Eel (CL 2)
##Centipede Swarm (CL 1)
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Centipede, giant (Man-sized) (CL 4)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Lethal) (CL 2)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Nonlethal) (CL 1)
##Chalkeions (CL 5-11)
##Chaos Knight (CL 14)
##Chimera (CL 11)
##Clawed Fiend (CL 3)
##Cloud Giant (CL 13)
##Cockatrice (CL 7)
##Crabmen (CL 3)
##Crocodile, giant (CL 6)
##Crocodile, normal (CL 3)
##Crumbler (CL 2)
##Darkmantle (CL 2)
##Demon, Dretch (CL 6)
##Demon, Lemures (CL 4)
##Demon, Manes (CL 2)
##Demon, Marilith (CL 13)
##Demon, Quasit (CL 7)
##Demon, Vrock (CL 9)
##Doppelganger (CL 5)
##Dragon, Black (CL varies)
##Dragon, Blue (CL varies)
##Dragon, Green (CL varies)
##Dragon, Red (CL varies)
##Dragon, White (CL varies)
##Drider (CL 9)
##Dwarf (CL 1)
##Efreeti (CL 12)
##Elemental, Air (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Earth (CL 8, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Fire (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Water (CL 8, 12, 16)
##Elf (CL 1)
##Ethereal Shade (CL 10)
##Ettercap (CL 6)
##Ettin (CL 10)
##Fire Giant (CL 12)
##Frog, giant (large) (CL 4)
##Frog, giant (medium) (CL 2)
##Frog, giant (small) (CL1)
##Frog, giant killer (CL 2)
##Fungal Creeper (CL 4)
##Fungi, violet (CL 4)
##Furious fountain (CL 18)
##Gargoyle (CL 6)
##Gargoyle, Maggog (CL 7)
##Gelatinous Cube (CL 5)
##Ghast (CL 5)
##Ghoul (CL 3)
##Ghoul, Ao-nyobo (blue wife) (CL 6)
##Giant Crab (CL 3)
##Giant, Hill (CL 9)
##Giant, Stone (CL 10)
##Gibbering Mouther (CL 6)
##Glass Butterfly (CL A)
##Glitterskull (CL 13)
##Gnoll (CL 2)
##Goblins (CL B)
##Goblins, Oni-Aka (CL 1)
##Goblins, Oni-Kage (CL 2)
##Goblins, Oni-Yama (CL 2)
##Goblins, Redcap (CL 1)
##Golem, Clay (CL 14)
##Golem, Flesh (CL 12)
##Golem, Iron (CL 18)
##Golem, Stone (CL 16)
##Golem, Wax (CL 7)
##Gorgon (CL 10)
##Green Slime (no CL)
##Grey Ooze (CL 5)
##Grick (CL 4)
##Grue (CL 10 or 11)
##Gump (CL 5)
##Hag, Annis (CL 10)
##Headless Hound (CL 7)
##Hieroglyphicroc (CL 8)
##Human, bandits (CL 1)
##Human, berserkers (CL 2)
##Hydra (CL 7-15)
##Igniguana (CL 6)
##Imp (CL 6)
##Leech, giant (CL 2-7)
##Lich (CL 15-21)
##Linnorm (CL 10)
##Lithonnite (CL 9)
##Lizard, giant (CL 3)
##Lizard, lightning (CL 7)
##Lizardman (CL 2)
##Lurker, Ceiling (CL 10)
##Lycanthrope, were-rat (CL 4)
##Lycanthrope, wereweasel (CL 5)
##Lycanthrope, werewolf (CL 5)
##Malcarna (CL 8)
##Malformian (CL 1)
##Manticore (CL 8)
##Clockwork, Bronze Cobra (CL 3)
##Clockwork, Iron Cobra (CL 5)
##Medusa (CL 8)
##Mimic (CL 8)
##Mind Eater (CL 12)
##Minotaur (CL 6)
##Mold, Brown (CL 4)
##Mold, Yellow (CL 3)
##Monstrous Mouth (CL 8)
##Mummy (CL 7)
##Naga, Guardian (CL 13)
##Naga, Spirit (CL 13)
##Oblivion Wraith (CL 14)
##Ogre (CL 4)
##Ogre Mage (CL 7)
##Ogre, Tusken (CL 5)
##Ophidian (CL 5 or 3)
##Orc (CL 1)
##Otyugh (CL 8)
##Owlbear (CL 5)
##Piercer (CL 1-4)
##Pseudo-dragon (CL 5)
##Purple Worm (CL 17)
##Rat, Giant (CL A)
##Rat, Giant Desongnol (CL 1)
##Rat, Giant, monstrously huge (CL 3)
##Ratling (CL 2)
##Roper (CL 11-13)
##Rot Grub (CL 1)
##Rust Monster (CL 5)
##Shadow (CL 4)
##Shadow Mastiff (CL 5)
##Shocker Lizard (CL 2)
##Shrieker (CL 3)
##Silent Knight (CL 8)
##Sorcery Leech (CL 1)
##Spectre (CL 9)
##Spider, Giant, Flagstone (CL 1)
##Spiderweed (CL 2)
##Spine Rat (CL A)
##Stirges (CL 1)
##Stoneflower (CL 5)
##Sumatran Rat-ghouls (CL 1)
##Thugtoads (CL 2)
##Ticks, Giant (CL 3)
##Troglodyte (CL 3)
##Troll (CL 8)
##Tunnel Prawn (CL 1)
##Vampire (CL 10-12)
##Vargouille (CL 4)
##Walking Slimes (CL 4)
##Weasels, Giant (CL 5)
##Wight (CL 5)
##Wraith (CL 6)
##Xorn (CL 8)
##Yurmp (CL 5)
##Zombie (CL 2)
##
##Dungeon, Weirder Subtable
##Amphorons of Yothri (CL 4, 8, 13)
##Androsphinx (CL 15)
##Arcanix (CL 4, 8, 14)
##Bag of Teeth (CL 1)
##Beetle, Giant Arcane (CL 7)
##Bone Mound (CL 12)
##Carrion Fly (CL 7)
##Criosphinx (CL 10)
##Crystal Growth (CL 5)
##Crystaline (CL 5)
##Dergenue (CL 3)
##Dhezik (CL 5)
##Dragolem (CL 11)
##Exoskeleton (giant ant) (CL 2)
##Exoskeleton (giant beetle) (CL 5)
##Exploding Bones (CL 3)
##Flying squirrel, carnivorous (CL B)
##Formian male (CL 9)
##Formian taskmaster (CL 8)
##Formian warrior (CL 5)
##Formian worker (CL 1)
##Froglum (CL 8)
##Glurm (CL 4)
##Goblins, Belfry (CL 3)
##Great Lantern Worm (CL 30)
##Gynosphinx (CL 9)
##Harpy (CL 4)
##Hawktoad (CL 3)
##Head Stealer (CL 3)
##Headless Hound (CL 7)
##Hieracosphinx (CL 9)
##Hounds of Chronos (CL 5)
##Iounifier (CL varies)
##Lamia (CL 12)
##Leaping Maw (CL 2)
##Lizard Samurai (CL 3)
##Marrosian Statue (CL 5)
##Clockwork, Clockwork Cavalier (CL 5)
##Melgara (CL 5)
##Mirror Fiend (CL 12)
##Mushroom-men (CL 5,3,1)
##Oblivion Wraith (CL 14)
##Ogre Mage (CL 7)
##Ogre, Tusken (CL 5)
##Old Crawler (CL 3)
##Omgoth (CL 5)
##Origami Warrior (CL 2)
##Ragged Craw (CL 3)
##Ranine (CL 4)
##Rat, Wizard’s Lab (CL 2)
##Rock Weasel, Giant (CL 5)
##Rothran (CL 7)
##Rottentail (CL 4)
##Skullmural (CL 3)
##Slitherat (CL 4)
##Slithering Tracker (CL 6)
##Sloorg (CL 6)
##Slug, Giant (CL 13)
##Sorcerer Ox (CL 7)
##Spectral Scavenger (CL 11)
##Spider, Giant, Invisible (CL 8)
##Star-Mouthed Worm (CL 12)
##Thelidu (CL 8)
##Trapper Beast (CL 11-13)
##Treacherous Treasure (CL 7)
##Tsalakian (CL 7)
##Vampire (CL 10-12)
##Vierd (CL 4)
##Will-o-Wisp (CL 10)
##Yienhools (CL 1)
##Yith, hounds of (CL 7)
##Zombie, Brain-Eating (CL 5)
##Zombie, Leper (CL 3)
##Zombie, Pyre (CL 3)
##
##Forests, Basic Table
##Ankheg (CL 4-9)
##Ant, giant (CL 2, 4, 8)
##Aranea (CL 7)
##Archer Tree (CL 8)
##Assassin Vine (CL 8)
##Badger, Giant (CL 3)
##Bear, Cave (CL 7)
##Bear, Grizzly (CL 6)
##Beetle, Giant (CL 4)
##Birhaakamen (CL 2)
##Boar, Wild (CL 4)
##Bugbear (CL 3)
##Catoblepas (CL 8)
##Centaur (CL 5)
##Centipede Swarm (CL 1)
##Centipede, giant (Man-sized) (CL 4)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Lethal) (CL 2)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Nonlethal) (CL 1)
##Chimera (CL 11)
##Clawed Fiend (CL 3)
##Cockatrice (CL 7)
##Draug (CL 3)
##Druid (CL 6, 10, 14)
##Dryad (CL 3)
##Elf (CL 1)
##Ettercap (CL 6)
##Ettin (CL 10)
##Ferec (CL 6)
##Flying squirrel, carnivorous (CL B)
##Fox monk (CL 3)
##Frog, giant (large) (CL 4)
##Frog, giant (medium) (CL 2)
##Frog, giant (small) (CL1)
##Fungi, violet (CL 4)
##Gnoll (CL 2)
##Goblins (CL B)
##Goblins, Belfry (CL 3)
##Goblins, Redcap (CL 1)
##Gwurrum (CL 10)
##Hag, Annis (CL 10)
##Harpy (CL 4)
##Headless Hound (CL 7)
##Human, Bandits (CL 1)
##Human, Berserkers (CL 2)
##Human, Patrol (CL 1)
##Lamia (CL 12)
##Leprechaun (CL 5)
##Linnorm (CL 10)
##Lizard, giant (CL 3)
##Lycanthrope, werebear (CL 8)
##Lycanthrope, wereboar (CL 6)
##Lycanthrope, were-rat (CL 4)
##Lycanthrope, wereweasel (CL 5)
##Lycanthrope, werewolf (CL 5)
##Lynx, giant (CL 2)
##Manticore (CL 8)
##Mantis, Giant Praying (CL 9)
##Ogre (CL 4)
##Ogre Mage (CL 7)
##Ogre, Tusken (CL 5)
##Owl, Giant (CL 5)
##Owlbear (CL 5)
##Pixie (CL 5)
##Raven, Giant (CL 4)
##Skunk, Giant (CL 6)
##Snake, Constrictor (CL 2)
##Snake, Javelin (CL 2)
##Snake, Viper (CL 2)
##Spider, Giant (1 ft. diameter) (CL 3)
##Spider, Giant (4 ft. diameter) (CL 5)
##Spider, Giant (6 ft. diameter) (CL 7)
##Spiderweed (CL 2)
##Spire Monkey (CL 2)
##Stag, Giant (CL 4)
##Stirge (CL 1)
##Thylacine (CL 2)
##Ticks, Giant (CL 3)
##Tigers, Giant (CL 7)
##Unicorn (CL 6)
##Vargouille (CL 4)
##Wasps, Giant (CL 6)
##Wolves (CL 2)
##Wolves, Worg (CL 4)
##
##Forests, Weirder Subtable
##Allip (CL 7)
##Athatch (CL 15)
##Blink dog (CL 4)
##Borsin (CL 4)
##Carrion Fly (CL 7)
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Chaos Knight (CL 14)
##Corpse Tree (CL 7)
##Couatl (CL 11)
##Dinosaur, Ankylosaurus (CL 8)
##Dinosaur, Brontosaurus (CL 25)
##Dinosaur, Stegosaurus (CL 15)
##Dinosaur, Triceratops (CL 15)
##Dinosaur, Tyrannosaurus (CL 19)
##Exoskeleton (giant ant) (CL 2)
##Exoskeleton (giant beetle) (CL 5)
##Formian male (CL 9)
##Formian taskmaster (CL 8)
##Formian warrior (CL 5)
##Formian worker (CL 1)
##Frog, giant killer (CL 2)
##Ghoul, Ao-nyobo (blue wife) (CL 6)
##Giant, Hill (CL 9)
##Gibbering Mouther (CL 6)
##Glurm (CL 4)
##Goblins, Oni-Aka (CL 1)
##Gravebird (CL 3)
##Gump (CL 5)
##Hawktoad (CL 3)
##Head Stealer (CL 3)
##Hydra (CL 7-15)
##Leech, giant (CL 2-7)
##Leucrota (CL 6)
##Lizard Samurai (CL 3)
##Lizardman (CL 2)
##Macaw, giant (CL 5)
##Malcarna (CL 8)
##Malformians (CL 1)
##Maun-Ge (CL 3)
##Medusa (CL 8)
##Melgara (CL 5)
##Melhukiskata (CL 4)
##Mothdog (CL 2)
##Mothmere (CL 11)
##Mushroom-men (CL 5,3,1)
##Omgoth (CL 5)
##Ophidian (CL 5 or 3)
##Ragged Craw (CL 3)
##Razor Wing (CL 2)
##Satyr (CL 6)
##Shadow (CL 4)
##Shadow Mastiff (CL 5)
##Shocker Lizard (CL 2)
##Snake, Giant Constrictor (CL 7)
##Snake, Giant Viper (CL 6)
##Sorcerer Ox (CL 7)
##Spider, Giant, Invisible (CL 8)
##Tangle Weed/Strangle Vine (CL 6)
##Tendriculos (CL 9)
##Tiger, Giant (CL 7)
##Tiger, Sabre-Tooth (CL 8)
##Treant (CL 7-12)
##Tree Ghost (CL 10)
##Urslumber (CL 6)
##Vampire Trees (CL 6)
##Wight (CL 5)
##Wraith (CL 6)
##Ygg (CL 10)
##Yith, hounds of (CL 7)
##Yurmp (CL 5)
##
##
##
##Grasslands, Basic Table
##Aardvark, giant (CL 11)
##Air Gusts (CL 4)
##Ankheg (CL 4-9)
##Ant, giant (CL 2, 4, 8)
##Birhaakamen (CL 2)
##Blink dog (CL 4)
##Boar, wild (CL 4)
##Borsin (CL 4)
##Bullette (CL 11)
##Catoblepas (CL 8)
##Cattle (CL 3)
##Centaur (CL 5)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Lethal) (CL 2)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Nonlethal) (CL 1)
##Chalkeions (CL 5-11)
##Chimera (CL 11)
##Cockatrice (CL 7)
##Dragonne (CL 10)
##Druid (CL 6, 10, 14)
##Eagle, giant (CL 4)
##Elephant (CL 11)
##Fox monk (CL 3)
##Frog, giant (large) (CL 4)
##Frog, giant (medium) (CL 2)
##Frog, giant (small) (CL1)
##Fungi, violet (CL 4)
##Gnoll (CL 2)
##Goat, giant (CL 3)
##Gorgon (CL 10)
##Gwurrum (CL 10)
##Hippogriff (CL 4)
##Human, bandits (CL 1)
##Human, patrol (CL 1)
##Hyena (CL 1)
##Hyena, giant (CL 5)
##Lamia (CL 12)
##Lion (CL 5)
##Lycanthrope, wereboar (CL 6)
##Lycanthrope, were-rat (CL 4)
##Lycanthrope, weretiger (CL 7)
##Lycanthrope, werewolf (CL 5)
##Ogre (CL 4)
##Ostrich, Giant (CL 3)
##Pixie (CL 5)
##Ragged Craw (CL 3)
##Raven, Giant (CL 4)
##Skunk, Giant (CL 6)
##Snake, Viper (CL 2)
##Spider, Giant (1 ft. diameter) (CL 3)
##Stag, Giant (CL 4)
##Thugtoads (CL 2)
##Tiger, Giant (CL 7)
##Toads, Giant (CL 3)
##Unicorn (CL 6)
##Wasps, Giant (CL 6)
##Wolves (CL 2)
##Wolves, Worg (CL 4)
##
##Grasslands, Weirder Subtable
##Baboon (CL 2)
##Baboon, Giant (CL 4)
##Carrion Fly (CL 7)
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Centipede, giant (Man-sized) (CL 4)
##Chaos Knight (CL 14)
##Crocodile, giant (CL 6)
##Crocodile, normal (CL 3)
##Dinosaur, Ankylosaurus (CL 8)
##Dinosaur, Brontosaurus (CL 25)
##Dinosaur, Stegosaurus (CL 15)
##Dinosaur, Triceratops (CL 15)
##Dinosaur, Tyrannosaurus (CL 19)
##Draug (CL 3)
##Exoskeleton (giant ant) (CL 2)
##Exoskeleton (giant beetle) (CL 5)
##Felikaur (CL 9)
##Ferec (CL 6)
##Formian male (CL 9)
##Formian taskmaster (CL 8)
##Formian warrior (CL 5)
##Formian worker (CL 1)
##Frog, giant killer (CL 2)
##Ghoul, Ao-nyobo (blue wife) (CL 6)
##Glurm (CL 4)
##Goblins (CL B)
##Harpy (CL 4)
##Head Stealer (CL 3)
##Headless Hound (CL 7)
##Hieroglyphicroc (CL 8)
##Human, patrol (CL 1)
##Igniguana (CL 6)
##Leucrota (CL 6)
##Lizard Samurai (CL 3)
##Lizard, giant (CL 3)
##Lycanthrope, wereweasel (CL 5)
##Malcarna (CL 8)
##Malformians (CL 1)
##Mammoth (CL 13)
##Maun-Ge (CL 3)
##Melgara (CL 5)
##Mothdog (CL 2)
##Mothmere (CL 11)
##Mushroom-men (CL 5,3,1)
##Night Hag (CL 11)
##Nightmare (CL 10)
##Ogre Mage (CL 7)
##Ogre, Tusken (CL 5)
##Omgoth (CL 5)
##Pegasus (CL 4)
##Razor Wing (CL 2)
##Rhinoceros (CL 8)
##Snake, Giant Spitting (CL 6)
##Snake, Giant Viper (CL 6)
##Sorcerer Ox (CL 7)
##Spider, Giant (4 ft. diameter) (CL 5)
##Spider, Giant (6 ft. diameter) (CL 7)
##Sycorex (CL 7)
##Tangle Weed/Strangle Vine (CL 6)
##Tendriculos (CL 9)
##Tiger, Sabre-Tooth (CL 8)
##Toad, Giant Poisonous (CL 4)
##Torthri (CL 3)
##Tsalakians (CL 7)
##Urslumber (CL 6)
##Vampire Trees (CL 6)
##Wight (CL 5)
##Yaruga (CL 3)
##Yith, hounds of (CL 7)
##Yurmp (CL 5)
##
##Hills, Basic Table
##Aardvark, giant (CL 11)
##Air Gusts (CL 4)
##Androsphinx (CL 15)
##Ankheg (CL 4-9)
##Ant, giant (CL 2, 4, 8)
##Archer Tree (CL 8)
##Assassin Vine (CL 8)
##Badger, Giant (CL 3)
##Bear, Cave (CL 7)
##Birhaakamen (CL 2)
##Blink dog (CL 4)
##Bugbear (CL 3)
##Bulette (CL 11)
##Centaur (CL 5)
##Centipede Swarm (CL 1)
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Centipede, giant (Man-sized) (CL 4)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Lethal) (CL 2)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Nonlethal) (CL 1)
##Chalkeions (CL 5-11)
##Chimera (CL 11)
##Clawed Fiend (CL 3)
##Cloud Giant (CL 13)
##Cockatrice (CL 7)
##Couatl (CL 11)
##Criosphinx (CL 10)
##Dragon, Blue (CL varies)
##Dragonne (CL 10)
##Druid (CL 6, 10, 14)
##Dwarf (CL 1)
##Eagle, giant (CL 4)
##Elemental, Air (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Earth (CL 8, 13, 17)
##Elephant (CL 11)
##Ettercap (CL 6)
##Ettin (CL 10)
##Flying squirrel, carnivorous (CL B)
##Fox monk (CL 3)
##Fungi, violet (CL 4)
##Gargoyle (CL 6)
##Ghoul, Ao-nyobo (blue wife) (CL 6)
##Giant, Hill (CL 9)
##Giant, Stone (CL 10)
##Giant, Storm (CL 16)
##Gnoll (CL 2)
##Goat, giant (CL 3)
##Goblins (CL B)
##Goblins, Oni-Aka (CL 1)
##Goblins, Oni-Yama (CL 2)
##Goblins, Redcap (CL 1)
##Gorgon (CL 10)
##Griffon (CL 8)
##Gynosphinx (CL 9)
##Hag, Annis (CL 10)
##Harpy (CL 4)
##Headless Hound (CL 7)
##Hieracosphinx (CL 9)
##Hippogriff (CL 4)
##Human, bandits (CL 1)
##Human, Berserkers (CL 2)
##Human, Patrol (CL 1)
##Hydra (CL 7-15)
##Hyena (CL 1)
##Hyena, Giant (CL 5)
##Igniguana (CL 6)
##Lamia (CL 12)
##Leucrota (CL 6)
##Linnorm (CL 10)
##Lion (CL 5)
##Lizard, giant (CL 3)
##Lycanthrope, werebear (CL 8)
##Lycanthrope, wereboar (CL 6)
##Lycanthrope, were-rat (CL 4)
##Lycanthrope, weretiger (CL 7)
##Lycanthrope, werewolf (CL 5)
##Lynx, giant (CL 2)
##Malformians (CL 1)
##Manticore (CL 8)
##Medusa (CL 8)
##Minotaur (CL 6)
##Naga, Guardian (CL 13)
##Naga, Spirit (CL 13)
##Ogre (CL 4)
##Ogre Mage (CL 7)
##Ogre, Tusken (CL 5)
##Ophidian (CL 5 or 3)
##Orc (CL 1)
##Owl, Giant (CL 5)
##Owlbear (CL 5)
##Pegasus (CL 4)
##Peryton (CL 6)
##Pixie (CL 5)
##Pseudo-dragon (CL 5)
##Ragged Craw (CL 3)
##Raven, Giant (CL 4)
##Shadow (CL 4)
##Shocker Lizard (CL 2)
##Skunk, Giant (CL 6)
##Sorcerer Ox (CL 7)
##Spider, Giant (1 ft. diameter) (CL 3)
##Spider, Giant (4 ft. diameter) (CL 5)
##Spider, Giant (6 ft. diameter) (CL 7)
##Stag, Giant (CL 4)
##Thylacine (CL 2)
##Unicorn (CL 6)
##Wasps, Giant (CL 6)
##Wight (CL 5)
##Wolves (CL 2)
##Wolves, Worg (CL 4)
##Wyvern (CL 10)
##
##Hills, Weirder Subtable
##Athatch (CL 15)
##Banshee (CL 11)
##Behir (CL 13)
##Blink Dog (CL 4)
##Carrion Fly (CL 7)
##Chaos Knight (CL 14)
##Corpse Tree (CL 7)
##Draug (CL 3)
##Drider (CL 9)
##Ethereal Shade (CL 10)
##Exoskeleton (giant ant) (CL 2)
##Exoskeleton (giant beetle) (CL 5)
##Felikaur (CL 9)
##Ferec (CL 6)
##Flying Jellyfish (CL 19)
##Formian male (CL 9)
##Formian taskmaster (CL 8)
##Formian warrior (CL 5)
##Formian worker (CL 1)
##Frog, giant killer (CL 2)
##Ghast (CL 5)
##Ghoul (CL 3)
##Glurm (CL 4)
##Goblins, Belfry (CL 3)
##Golem, Iron (CL 18)
##Gravebird (CL 3)
##Grey Ooze (CL 5)
##Gwurrum (CL 10)
##Hag, Mountain (Yama-Uba) (CL 7)
##Headless Hound (CL 7)
##Hounds of Chronos (CL 5)
##Leopard (CL 4)
##Lich (CL 15-21)
##Lizard Samurai (CL 3)
##Lizard, lightning (CL 7)
##Lycanthrope, wereweasel (CL 5)
##Malcarna (CL 8)
##Mammoth (CL 13)
##Maun-Ge (CL 3)
##Clockwork, Giant Robot (CL 19)
##Melgara (CL 5)
##Mogura-jin (CL 2)
##Mothdog (CL 2)
##Mothmere (CL 11)
##Mushroom-men (CL 5,3,1)
##Night Hag (CL 11)
##Nightmare (CL 10)
##Nykoul (CL 11)
##Omgoth (CL 5)
##Razor Wing (CL 2)
##Rock Weasel, Giant (CL 5)
##Shocker Lizard (CL 2)
##Silent Knight (CL 8)
##Skeletal Fury (CL 3)
##Stirges (CL 1)
##Sumatran Rat-ghouls (CL 1)
##Tiger, Giant (CL 7)
##Tiger, Sabre-Tooth (CL 8)
##Toad. Giant Poisonous (CL 4)
##Troll (CL 8)
##Tsalakians (CL 7)
##Uruak (scrap gnolls) (CL 2)
##Vampire Trees (CL 6)
##Vapor Crane (CL 2,3,6)
##Vargouille (CL 4)
##Yith, hounds of (CL 7)
##
##Jungle Basic Table
##Ape, flying (CL 6)
##Ape, gorilla (CL 4)
##Aranea (CL 7)
##Assassin Vine (CL 8)
##Athatch (CL 15)
##Baboon, Giant (CL 4)
##Baboon, Normal (CL 3)
##Bat Monster (CL 9)
##Bat, Giant (CL 5)
##Bear, Black (CL 4)
##Bear, Cave (CL 7)
##Beetle, Giant (CL 4)
##Beetle, Giant Fire (CL 1)
##Beetle, Giant Huhu (CL 2)
##Boar, Wild (CL 4)
##Borsin (CL 4)
##Carrion Fly (CL 7)
##Catoblepas (CL 8)
##Centipede Swarm (CL 1)
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Centipede, giant (Man-sized) (CL 4)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Lethal) (CL 2)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Nonlethal) (CL 1)
##Clawed Fiend (CL 3)
##Couatl (CL 11)
##Crabmen (CL 3)
##Crocodile, giant (CL 6)
##Crocodile, normal (CL 3)
##Elephant (CL 11)
##Ettercap (CL 6)
##Ettin (CL 10)
##Frog, giant (large) (CL 4)
##Frog, giant (medium) (CL 2)
##Frog, giant (small) (CL1)
##Frog, giant killer (CL 2)
##Fungi, violet (CL 4)
##Ghast (CL 5)
##Ghoul (CL 3)
##Green Slime (no CL)
##Grey Ooze (CL 5)
##Grick (CL 4)
##Gump (CL 5)
##Harpy (CL 4)
##Hieroglyphicroc (CL 8)
##Hippopotamus (CL 7)
##Human, Berserkers (CL 2)
##Human, Patrol (CL 1)
##Hydra (CL 7-15)
##Leech, giant (CL 2-7)
##Leopard (CL 4)
##Lizard, giant (CL 3)
##Lizardman (CL 2)
##Lycanthrope, were-rat (CL 4)
##Lycanthrope, weretiger (CL 7)
##Macaw, giant (CL 5)
##Mantis, Giant Praying (CL 9)
##Medusa (CL 8)
##Naga, Guardian (CL 13)
##Naga, Hanu- (CL 6)
##Naga, Spirit (CL 13)
##Ochre Jelly (CL 6)
##Ophidian (CL 5 or 3)
##Shadow (CL 4)
##Spider, Giant (1 ft. diameter) (CL 3)
##Spider, Giant (4 ft. diameter) (CL 5)
##Spider, Giant (6 ft. diameter) (CL 7)
##Vampire Trees (CL 6)
##Zombie, Brain-Eating (CL 5)
##
##Jungle, Weirder Subtable
##Banshee (CL 11)
##Bugbear (CL 3)
##Cloud Giant (CL 13)
##Crabnipede (CL 5)
##Dinosaur, Ankylosaurus (CL 8)
##Dinosaur, Brontosaurus (CL 25)
##Dinosaur, Stegosaurus (CL 15)
##Dinosaur, Triceratops (CL 15)
##Dinosaur, Tyrannosaurus (CL 19)
##Exoskeleton (giant ant) (CL 2)
##Exoskeleton (giant beetle) (CL 5)
##Felikaur (CL 9)
##Formian male (CL 9)
##Formian taskmaster (CL 8)
##Formian warrior (CL 5)
##Formian worker (CL 1)
##Giant, Storm (CL 16)
##Gibbering Mouther (CL 6)
##Glurm (CL 4)
##Goblins (CL B)
##Goblins, Belfry (CL 3)
##Goblins, Oni-Aka (CL 1)
##Goblins, Oni-Kage (CL 2)
##Goblins, Redcap (CL 1)
##Golem, Stone (CL 16)
##Gravebird (CL 3)
##Hag, Annis (CL 10)
##Hawktoad (CL 3)
##Lephane (CL 8)
##Lich (CL 15-21)
##Malcarna (CL 8)
##Malformians (CL 1)
##Manticore (CL 8)
##Mushroom-men (CL 5,3,1)
##Ogre (CL 4)
##Ogre Mage (CL 7)
##Ogre, Tusken (CL 5)
##Omgoth (CL 5)
##Shadow Mastiff (CL 5)
##Shocker Lizard (CL 2)
##Sycorex (CL 7)
##Torthri (CL 3)
##Vargouille (CL 4)
##Wight (CL 5)
##Yith, hounds of (CL 7)
##Yurmp (CL 5)
##
##
##Mountains, Basic Table
##Air Gusts (CL 4)
##Androsphinx (CL 15)
##Ant, Giant (CL 2, 4, 8)
##Athatch (CL 15)
##Bear, Grizzly (CL 6)
##Bugbear (CL 3)
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Centipede, giant (Man-sized) (CL 4)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Lethal) (CL 2)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Nonlethal) (CL 1)
##Chimera (CL 11)
##Cloud Giant (CL 13)
##Criosphinx (CL 10)
##Dragon, blue
##Dragon, red
##Dragonne (CL 10)
##Druid (CL 6, 10, 14)
##Dwarf (CL 1)
##Eagle, giant (CL 4)
##Elemental, Air (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Earth (CL 8, 13, 17)
##Elemental, Fire (CL 9, 13, 17)
##Ettin (CL 10)
##Fire Giant (CL 12)
##Gargoyle (CL 6)
##Giant, Stone (CL 10)
##Giant, Storm (CL 16)
##Goat, giant (CL 3)
##Goblins (CL B)
##Goblins, Oni-Aka (CL 1)
##Goblins, Oni-Yama (CL 2)
##Goblins, Redcap (CL 1)
##Golem, Iron (CL 18)
##Gorgon (CL 10)
##Griffon (CL 8)
##Gynosphinx (CL 9)
##Hag, Annis (CL 10)
##Harpy (CL 4)
##Hieracosphinx (CL 9)
##Hippogriff (CL 4)
##Igniguana (CL 6)
##Leucrota (CL 6)
##Linnorm (CL 10)
##Lycanthrope, werewolf (CL 5)
##Lynx, giant (CL 2)
##Manticore (CL 8)
##Medusa (CL 8)
##Minotaur (CL 6)
##Ogre (CL 4)
##Ogre Mage (CL 7)
##Ogre, Tusken (CL 5)
##Orc (CL 1)
##Owl, Giant (CL 5)
##Owlbear (CL 5)
##Pegasus (CL 4)
##Peryton (CL 6)
##Roc (CL 12)
##Shocker Lizard (CL 2)
##Skyworms (CL 4)
##Sorcerer Ox (CL 7)
##Spider, Giant (1 ft. diameter) (CL 3)
##Spider, Giant (4 ft. diameter) (CL 5)
##Spider, Giant (6 ft. diameter) (CL 7)
##Tatzelworm (CL 3)
##Tiger, Sabre-Tooth (CL 8)
##Vapor Crane (CL 2,3,6)
##Weasels, Giant (CL 5)
##Will-o-Wisp (CL 10)
##Wolves (CL 2)
##Wolves, Winter (CL 6)
##Wolves, Worg (CL 4)
##Wraith (CL 6)
##Wyvern (CL 10)
##Yeti (CL 7)
##
##Mountains, Weirder Subtable
##Amphorons of Yothri (CL 4, 8, 13)
##Azer (CL 2)
##Behir (CL 13)
##Crumbler (CL 2)
##Darkmantle (CL 2)
##Drider (CL 9)
##Exoskeleton (giant ant) (CL 2)
##Felikaur (CL 9)
##Flying Jellyfish (CL 19)
##Formian male (CL 9)
##Formian taskmaster (CL 8)
##Formian warrior (CL 5)
##Formian worker (CL 1)
##Glurm (CL 4)
##Hag, Mountain (Yama-Uba) (CL 7)
##Lightning lamprey (CL 1)
##Lizard, lightning (CL 7)
##Malcarna (CL 8)
##Malformians (CL 1)
##Maun-Ge (CL 3)
##Mothmere (CL 11)
##Night Hag (CL 11)
##Nightmare (CL 10)
##Oblivion Wraith (CL 14)
##Rock Weasel, Giant (CL 5)
##Rothran (CL 7)
##Shadow (CL 4)
##Shocker Lizard (CL 2)
##Slitherat (CL 4)
##Squid, Giant Aerial (CL 14)
##Stoneflower (CL 5)
##Sycorex (CL 7)
##Titan (CL 17-22)
##Troll (CL 8)
##Uruak (scrap gnolls) (CL 2)
##Xorn (CL 8)
##Yith, hounds of (CL 7)
##
##
##Swamp, Basic Table
##Allip (CL 7)
##Aqueous Orb (CL 5)
##Assassin Vine (CL 8)
##Athatch (CL 15)
##Banshee (CL 11)
##Basilisk (CL 8)
##Bat, Giant (CL 5)
##Bear, Black (CL 4)
##Boar, Wild (CL 4)
##Catoblepas (CL 8)
##Centipede Swarm (CL 1)
##Centipede, giant (Large) (CL 6)
##Centipede, giant (Man-sized) (CL 4)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Lethal) (CL 2)
##Centipede, giant (Small, Nonlethal) (CL 1)
##Crabmen (CL 3)
##Crocodile, giant (CL 6)
##Crocodile, normal (CL 3)
##Dragon Turtle (CL 13)
##Dragon, Black (CL varies)
##Dragon, Green (CL varies)
##Elemental, Water (CL 8, 12, 16)
##Ettercap (CL 6)
##Ettin (CL 10)
##Frog, giant (large) (CL 4)
##Frog, giant (medium) (CL 2)
##Frog, giant (small) (CL1)
##Frog, giant killer (CL 2)
##Fungi, violet (CL 4)
##Ghast (CL 5)
##Ghoul (CL 3)
##Ghoul, Ao-nyobo (blue wife) (CL 6)
##Gillmonkey (CL B)
##Glurm (CL 4)
##Goblins, Oni-Kage (CL 2)
##Gravebird (CL 3)
##Green Slime (no CL)
##Grey Ooze (CL 5)
##Grick (CL 4)
##Gump (CL 5)
##Hag, Annis (CL 10)
##Harpy (CL 4)
##Hawktoad (CL 3)
##Hippopotamus (CL 7)
##Human, Patrol (CL 1)
##Hydra (CL 7-15)
##Leech, giant (CL 2-7)
##Lephane (CL 8)
##Lizard, giant (CL 3)
##Lizardman (CL 2)
##Lycanthrope, were-rat (CL 4)
##Macaw, giant (CL 5)
##Medusa (CL 8)
##Ogre (CL 4)
##Raven, Giant (CL 4)
##Snake, Constrictor (CL 2)
##Snake, Viper (CL 2)
##Spider, Giant (1 ft. diameter) (CL 3)
##Spider, Giant (4 ft. diameter) (CL 5)
##Spider, Giant (6 ft. diameter) (CL 7)
##Spiderweed (CL 2)
##Spine Rat (CL A)
##Stirges (CL 1)
##Thugtoads (CL 2)
##Toad. Giant Poisonous (CL 4)
##Toad, Giant (CL 3)
##Will-o-Wisp (CL 10)
##Zombie (CL 2)
##Zombie, Brain-Eating (CL 5)
##
##Swamp, Weirder Subtable
##Ape, flying (CL 6)
##Bat Monster (CL 9)
##Bat, giant (CL 5)
##Behir (CL 13)
##Carrion Fly (CL 7)
##Couatl (CL 11)
##Crabnipede (CL 5)
##Dragon Turtle (CL 13)
##Exoskeleton (giant beetle) (CL 5)
##Giant Crab (CL 3)
##Gibbering Mouther (CL 6)
##Goblins (CL B)
##Goblins, Belfry (CL 3)
##Goblins, Redcap (CL 1)
##Head Stealer (CL 3)
##Hieroglyphicroc (CL 8)
##Malcarna (CL 8)
##Malformians (CL 1)
##Maun-Ge (CL 3)
##Mushroom-men (CL 5,3,1)
##Naga, Guardian (CL 13)
##Naga, Hanu- (CL 6)
##Naga, Spirit (CL 13)
##Naga, Water (CL 10)
##Ochre Jelly (CL 6)
##Ogre Mage (CL 7)
##Ogre, Tusken (CL 5)
##Oktomon (CL 4)
##Omgoth (CL 5)
##Ophidian (CL 5 or 3)
##Shadow (CL 4)
##Shadow Mastiff (CL 5)
##Shambling Mound (CL 10-15)
##Slug, Giant (CL 13)
##Sorcery Leech (CL 1)
##Tangle Weed/Strangle Vine (CL 6)
##Tendriculos (CL 9)
##Todawan Master (CL 11)
##Torthri (CL 3)
##Urslumber (CL 6)
##Vargouille (CL 4)
##Wight (CL 5)
##Ygg (CL 10)
##Yurmp (CL 5)
##
##
##OPEN GAME CONTENT:
##Open Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of the Open Game License Version 1.0a (OGL).
##
##This entire work is designated as Open Game Content under the OGL, with the
##exception of the trademarks “Swords & Wizardry,” “S&W,” and “Mythmere Games,”
##and with the exception of all artwork.  These trademarks, and the Trade Dress
##of this work (font, layout, style of artwork, etc.) are reserved as Product
##Identity.
##
##OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a
##
##The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc ("Wizards"). All Rights Reserved.
##1. Definitions: (a)"Contributors" means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game Content; (b)"Derivative Material" means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) "Distribute" means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d)"Open Game Content" means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License, including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) "Product Identity" means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts; creatures characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f) "Trademark" means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) "Use", "Used" or "Using" means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) "You" or "Your" means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
##2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself. No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License.
##3.Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.
##4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content.
##5.Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License.
##6.Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing, and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder's name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original Open Game Content you Distribute.
##7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity. You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
##8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you are distributing are Open Game Content.
##9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use any authorized version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed under any version of this License.
##10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You Distribute.
##11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
##12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any Open Game Material so affected.
##13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this License.
##14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to the extent necessary to make it enforceable.
##15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
##Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
##System Reference Document Copyright 2000-2003, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.; Authors Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams, Rich Baker, Andy Collins, David Noonan, Rich Redman, Bruce R. Cordell, John D. Rateliff, Thomas Reid, James Wyatt, based on original material by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson.
##Swords & Wizardry Core Rules, Copyright 2008, Matthew J. Finch
##Monster Compendium: 0e, Copyright 2008, Matthew J. Finch
##
##END OF LICENSE
