s15: %(name)s from the Tome of Horrors Complete, Copyright 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and distributed by Frog God Games

Aberrant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 great club (2d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Physical deformity
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Aberrants are hideous giants standing about 14 feet tall, with deformed bodies
and limbs. Aberrants are covered in coarse, dark hair or blisters (for those
without body hair). They make their homes in caves, abandoned mines, or deep
underground away from civilization.  Many have physical deformities, such as
a misplaced or extra arm (an extra attack), eyes on the sides or back of their
head (to see people sneaking up on them), flapping ears (to better hear) or
a huge nose (to smell creatures).

Cyst Fist's Pass
A small troop of 16 aberrants from the Cyst Fist Tribe have
set up a camp at the crest of the mountain pass. Their leader
is the biggest of the tribe, a mountain of a creature named
Furgristle. This group has journeyed down from their caves
higher up in the mountains to raid and pillage, hoping to bring
back items to help the tribe get through the coming winter. The entire
group is wary and alert for danger after coming so close to civilization,
and have laid out an ambush along the path leading to their encampment.
The path leading through the dense temperate forest is eerily quiet, with
the sounds of the wind through the evergreens creating an occasional
whistle. Hiding in the trees at the ambush point are 4 aberrants, each
camouflaged with branches and leaves covering their deformed hides.

Two aberrants swing large logs suspended by vines down at the PCs to
knock them from their horses or to sweep them off their feet (1d6 points
of damage). When the logs hit, the remaining 2 aberrants charge the PCs
from the front.

The area around the campsite consists of discarded boulders, demolished
wagons, crates, barrels and other refuse taken during their raids. This
debris forms an extremely crude wall around the camp. Makeshift tents
made from overlapping canvas and torn leathers surround a large fire pit
sitting in the center of the camp. A partially eaten horse impaled on a
spit sits above the sputtering fire. A crow's cage hanging from a high
post contains a halfling dressed as a jester. Furgristle keeps the “little
human” as a pet because the halfling's acrobatics makes the aberrant
laugh. Eight aberrants remain in the camp at all times, while 4 others
walk the perimeter.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Abomination, Owlephant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack: Slam (2d6) and 2 claws (2d8) or gore (2d8)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Trample
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

This massive creature looks like an elephant with the head of a giant
owl. Beneath its tusks, two clawed arms protrude from its body, one to
each side of its elephantine trunk. Its feathered owl head is dark brown,
fading to gray as it blends into its elephant-like body. An owlephant can
trample opponent simply by moving over them. Those who fail a saving
throw suffer 2d8 points of damage each. Those who pass a saving throw
leap to the side to avoid the beast. Folk who choose not to avoid the
trample attack can make a counter attack at a +1 bonus to hit.

Copyright Notice: Authors Erica Balsley and Scott Greene.

Abomination, Tigrilla
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: 2 claws (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Rake with claws
Move: 15/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

This creature looks like a gorilla with the head of a tiger. Its arms end in
sharpened claws and its fur is orange-brown. Its head is striped like that
of a normal tiger.

A tigrilla attacks by raking with its claws and biting with its fangs. If it
hits the same opponent with both claws attacks it rakes with the claws,
inflicting an additional 1d8 points of damage.

The Old Hermit's Castle
The adventurers wander into a creepy jungle valley, thick with
vegetation but bearing wide paths that local guides claim were made by
elephants. Rising above the jungle there are the ruins of an old castle, one
owned, the guides say, by a weird old hermit. The hermit was a magician
of some ability who specialized in unnatural crossbreeds.

The castle sits upon a rocky hill covered with green vines and shrubbery.
A nest of 1d6 tigrilla lives on the slopes of the hill. A troupe of 1d4+4
owlephants and several owlbears dwell in the valley.

The castle looks as though it was destroyed in an explosion. Those
exploring the place will feel a sinister presence (the phantom of the
magician, see phantom entry in this book). Under the rubble, one might
find a partially collapsed staircase to the castle's dungeons. The dungeons
consist of a large common room connected to a laboratory on one side
and storage rooms and cells on the other. One of the cells holds two
human skeletons and a bloody bones (see entry in this book). The storage
rooms hold copper vats, some in need of repair, bottles of reagents and
phosphorescent liquids (poisonous to touch or taste) and other odds and
ends of a magicians laboratory. The laboratory's steel door is blown off
its hinges and the laboratory is completely destroyed.

Copyright Notice: Authors Erica Balsley and Scott Greene.

Abyssal Harvester
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 6 tentacles (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Constrict, harvest
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

This gigantic beast stands nearly 40 feet tall. It is a squat, bloated mass of
grayish, leathery flesh, somewhat in an oval shape with six long, serpentine
tentacles. A massive gaping maw dominates its top surface.  Hundreds of
smaller tentacles allow the creature to move. The tentacles, if they hit,
constrict for automatic damage after the initial hit. An abyssal harvester
– which normally resides in the Abyss – can push up to four tentacles into the
world. These tentacles appear out of thin air and can attack and grab victims
to “harvest” by dragging them back through the rift to the Abyss.

The Root Run Vanishings
The Root Run Tunnel is a winding, six-mile underground trade route.
The tunnel is 20 feet wide and its dirt ceiling varies from 12 to 20 feet.
Thick redwood roots stick through the ceiling like giant twisted serpents.
A flagstone entry goes for about a mile in from each tunnel entrance,
before turning into a smooth dirt floor. Crossbeams engraved with the
names of traders to use the tunnel are set every so often hold the ceiling
in place. Lanterns hang every 100 yards to light the path.

A group of travelers entered the tunnel a week ago but never came out.
Three people later found an abandoned cart at the tunnel's halfway point,
but no people. Rumors are flying that the Root Run is haunted. Fear has
halted the trade route, and the trade group that maintains the tunnel is
offering a 500 gp reward for the safe return of the missing travelers.
The reward won’t ever be collected. The missing traders met a gruesome
fate when an abyssal harvester broke through a hole in reality as they
passed. The grasping tentacles dragged the victims into the Abyss where
they were devoured. The abyssal harvester currently has four of its thick
tentacles stretched across the tunnel's passage to snare new victims. The
tentacles appear to be tree roots in the semi-darkness until they rise to
attack.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Abyssal Larva
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: acidic bite (2d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: maggot spray
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Abyssal larva look like puffy, bloated human-sized whitish-yellow
maggots with purplish veins pulsating under their fleshy forms. A vaguely
humanoid head sits atop its body and its facial features are twisted and
distraught, as if the creature was in a constant state of pain. A pair of
large, downward-curving horns juts from its head, just above its sunken
eyes. Its mouth is lined with filthy, sharpened fangs. Once per day, an
abyssal larva can regurgitate and spray a stream of maggots at a victim
within 10 feet. If the creature fails a save, it is sickened.

The Maggot Pits
This 70-foot-diameter circular room is a charnel house of gore. Twenty
decaying bodies hang from the 40-foot-high ceiling on rusted, barbed
chains. Transparent tubes wind among the chain links and siphon fluids
from the corpses. These tubes drape over 10-foot-tall wooden vats filled
with congealing blood.

Beneath the hanging bodies, millions of squirming maggots fill a
30-foot-wide pit in the center of the room. More maggots drop from the
hanging bodies into the pits below. The central pit is 10 feet deep, and
filled to floor level with maggots. Stone steps descend to the maggot pit's
floor, although using the steps nauseate those who try (save avoids).
In the maggot pit are 3 abyssal larva that spew a stream of maggots at
intruders before rising to attack. A magic-user summoned the creatures to
protect himself. He feeds the hanging bodies to the creatures after he has
drained their blood for his gruesome experiments.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Adherer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: 2 slams (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Adhesive, double damage from fire, resistance to blunt weapons (50%), surprise on 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The adherer is a subterranean humanoid whose folds of filthy, pale skin cause
it to resemble a mummy. It exudes sticky, sour smelling glue from its skin
that sticks to anything other than stone, including melee attacks.  Each
successful melee attack requires a saving throw to avoid it sticking fast to
the weird creature. Once a creature is stuck, it suffers 1d4 damage per round
from the grapple. The glue is dissolved by boiling water, and it breaks down
1 hour after the creature dies.

It Could Use a Little Salt
In a subterranean gallery draped with sticky fungal ropes and made
unbearably warm and humid by a hot spring that spews polychromatic
salts a gang of 1d3+1 adherers has made its home. They keep their treasure
in a sealed urn of terracotta which they have lowered into the spring – it is
now encrusted by the salts and difficult to discern from the uneven floor
of the pool created by the spring. Moreover, retrieving it is tricky without
a couple 10-ft poles. The adherers are rarely (2 in 6 chance) in their little
hideout, spending most of their time wandering the underworld looking
for treasure-laden victims to carry home, where they are dismembered
and boiled in the spring for a grisly repast, their treasure added to the urn.
In time, the adherers hope to collect a fitting tribute to some demon lord,
that they can request a release from their tortured existence.

Credit: The Adherer originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Guy Shearer.

Aerial Servant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Slam (4d4)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Throttle, invisibility, only harmed by magic weapons, wind blast
Move: 24/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4400

Aerial servants are semi-intelligent creatures from the Elemental Plane
of Air that often roam the Astral and Ethereal planes. They normally are
only found on the Material Plane as a result of being summoned by a
cleric using the aerial servant spell and commanded to perform some
task, often being required to use their immense strength to carry objects
or aid the summoner. Though an aerial servant performs whatever task is
asked of it, it resents being summoned and forced to do another's bidding;
therefore, it attempts to pervert the conditions of the summoning and its
mission. An aerial servant that fails or is thwarted in its mission becomes
insane and immediately returns to the caster who summoned it, either
killing the caster or carrying the caster back to the Elemental Plane of Air
with it. Aerial servants are naturally invisible, and thus remain invisible
even while attacking. Aerial servants can only be killed on their native
plane. If slain elsewhere, they simply dissolve into wisps of vapor and
return to their home plane.

Aerial servants attack by using a shearing blast of wind as a weapon or
by grabbing an opponent and crushing it within their powerful grasp. An
aerial servant can use its wind blast once every 1d4 rounds. The wind blast
has a range of 80 feet and can be used against a single target, inflicting
4d8 points of damage and knocking them back 2d10 feet. The target can
roll a saving throw to halve the damage and avoid being knocked back.
An aerial servant grapple inflicts 4d4 points of damage each round and is
notoriously difficult to break.

The Tomb of Zexus
When the archimage Zexus undertook the construction of his tomb,
he plotted a petty revenge on the lords of elemental air who had most
ungenerously done him wrong during his climb to the heights of wizardry.
So it was that he summoned an aerial servant with all the ordinary
perambulations and enticements and put it to the task of constructing a
fitting tomb for one as grand as Zexus Yellow-Eyed. In due time, the tomb
was constructed from massive slabs of precisely fitted marble. Zexus
induced his servant to follow him into the tomb and place the last stone
merely as a test. The slow-witted elemental saw no trickery, for surely the
mage yet lived and would not seal himself into a tomb willingly. Alas, this
was exactly the intention of Zexus, for a slow, persistent curse had been
withering his body for ages. The tomb sealed, the aerial servant found
itself standing in the middle of a cunningly designed magic circle, unable
to do anything while the mage slumped down in a silver chair, died and
over the course of a hundred years mouldered away. The servant remains
in the tomb, invisible and waiting only for the great slab to be moved and
a toe to step over the threshold, breaking the circle and releasing it to take
its century of impotent rage out on the toe's hapless owner.

Credit: The Aerial Servant originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.


Afanc
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 21
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Bite (5d6), 2 claws (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Swallow whole, sea swell
Move: 3/30 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 23/5,300

An afanc is a massive, gray-skinned whale with a bulbous
head similar to a catfish. Its eyes are sullen and blue and
its huge pectoral fins are serrated. These omnivorous
hunters roam the deep sea. If an afanc rolls a 15 or
above on its bite attack, it grasps a victim in its
toothy maw and swallows the creature whole on
the next round. When facing surface ships, an
afanc can raise its entire body out of the water
and crash down on the surface to generate a
30-foot-tall wave to swamp vessels.

The One That Got Away
The merchant ship Helene's Grace recently sailed
into the port city of Borenstown, its keel splintered
and its hull battered. The ship sits in port, listing
badly against a redwood pier that juts into the
Reaping Sea. Sailors swarm over the ship,
patching holes and repairing a splintered mast.
All look fearfully to the sea, watching for danger.
Helene's Grace has been on the run for three
days after an afanc attacked it in the open sea.
The ship accidentally rammed the surfacing
afanc, and the angry fish turned on the vessel.
It has trailed the ship ever since, battering the
hull and nearly capsizing it twice as Grace made
for shore. Captain Cor Balt fears the return of
the giant sea creature, and is offering 100 gp
to anyone who’ll protect the ship while repairs
are made. Around 20 townsfolk line the dock,
scanning the waters. Most don’t even know
what they are watching for.
The afanc rams the pillars supporting the dock
in anger before turning on the ship, throwing
many of the unfortunate townsfolk into the
harbor. Screams for help turn to terror as the giant
afanc breaches among the anchored vessels.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Ahlinni (Cackle Bird)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8) or impale (2d8), 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Breath weapon, impale
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The ahlinni, or cackle bird (so called because of its breath weapon) is
a 5-foot-tall flightless bird that dwells in thick forests. It is covered in
greenish feathers, and is nearly invisible when it lies motionless in its
leafy surroundings. The bird's beak is half the length of its body, and as
straight and strong as a long sword (2d8 damage). Wicked claws also
sprout from its wings. Once every three rounds, an ahlinni can expel a
pinkish gas that causes creatures that fail a save to fall to the ground
laughing manically for 1d3 rounds.

A Bird in the Hand
A 30-foot-wide marble fountain sits in a clearing deep in the Kajaani
Forest, its cool, clear waters gurgling in the foot-deep basin. Vinecovered ruins around the fountain are slowly being reclaimed by the
forest. Standing at the cardinal points of the fountain are four statues of
laughing nymphs holding vases of sculpted flowers. Diamond chips are
worked into the marble surfaces, so the entire fountain glints and gleams
in the sunlight.
A 20-foot-tall central statue of a massive crane-like man stands in the
center of the fountain, its sculpted feathers also decorated with bits of
sparkling glass and precious stones. Its bird head has a beak that is partly
open. The giant figure has two outstretched arms with its palms cupped
together. Water pours from between the statues intertwined fingers and
drops into the basin below. A pink mist floats across the splashing waters,
and birds cackle noisily in the treetops.
The clearing is the home of a flock of cackle birds.
The flock leader has her nest in the statue's cupped
hands, while the rest of the flock shelters in the
treetops surrounding the clearing. The flock
leader considers the fountain her “treasure” and
frequently breathes her pinkish gas out over the
water to mark her territory. The gas floats across
the surface, infusing the water with the laughing
properties. Anyone drinking the water must save
or fall to the ground laughing uncontrollably.
There are 10 total birds in the clearing. The nine
in the treetops hop to the ground to defend their
leader should PCs threaten her nest.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley.

Algoid
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 slams (1d10)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Immunity to electricity and fire, resistance to blunt
weapons (50%), mind blast, surprise on 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

The algoid is a living colony of algae that has developed some
semblance of intelligence and mobility. It is roughly humanoid in shape
and resembles a green humanoid. Algoids make their lairs in marshes and
swamps. They are often encountered with other marsh-dwelling sentient
plants; though never with shambling mounds (they hate them and usually
attack them on sight). In its natural surroundings, it is nearly invisible
until it attacks and uses this to its advantage when prey is nearby. Algoids
can “wake” trees as do treants. Once per day, an algoid can use a mind
blast in a 60-foot cone. Any creature caught in the cone must succeed on
a saving throw or be stunned for 3d4 rounds. Control water spells deal
1d6 points of damage per caster level to algoids, with no saving throw
allowed.

Someone Should Clean This Up
Water features are a wonderful addition to any dungeon complex, but
over time they become something of a bother without an apprentice to
keep them clean. In a misty corridor of one dungeon adventurers might
come across a truly impressive spectacle – a chamber 30-ft wide and
60-ft long taken up by a stepped pool that gets as deep as 5-ft. Drains
trickle water into the pool from a number of lead pipes capped by copper
grotesques set into the walls, which are further ornamented by panels of
speculum, a highly reflective alloy of copper and tin. A clogged drain
in the bottom of the pool, covered by a copper grill, allows water to
slowly escape the pool for lower levels of the underworld. Over
time, the pool has acquired a thick layer of algae and a cluster
of 1d4+2 algoids that lurk just beneath the surface. The floor
of the pool is littered with their accumulated treasures, which
they sometimes use as bait – leaving a few coins or a nice
gem resting on the edge of the pool. The corpses of felled
adventurers are layered with algae and, eventually, join
the cluster.

Credit: The Algoid originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based original
material by Mike Ferguson.

Al-mi’raj
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Horn (1d6)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Blink, dimension door, immune to
poison, magic resistance 30%
Move:   24
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

The al-mi’raj is a large rabbit with white, pink, yellow, or light green fur
and a long golden or black horn. Al-mi’raj can blink (as the spell) and use
a dimension door effect once per round. Rare al’mi’raj are more intelligent
than their kin and have the following psionic powers: Control winds, darkness
15-ft radius, levitate and telekinesis. These psionic al-mi’raj have
a challenge level of 3.

You’ve Been Warren-ed
On a green and pleasant pasture crossed by a lazy stream thick with lilypads
and choked with reeds 1d10+10 al-mi’raj, including a psionic leader, have
established a warren. During the daytime, one sees the creatures hopping
around the meadow, grazing on the tender grasses and digging up roots, their
golden horns shimmering in the sunlight. At the first sign of intruders, the
creatures begin to hiss, and a swift wind sweeps across the meadow. Then the
warm light of the sun is replaced by a thick, inky darkness. The intruders now
discombobulated, the canny beasts quickly surround them and then charge into
battle, blinking if the intruders find a way to defeat their darkness ability.
The bones of an unfortunate mage lying in reeds bears silent witness to the
effectiveness of the al-mi’raj's territorial defense.

Credit: The Al-mi’raj originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Roger Musson.

Amphisbaena
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 bites (1d6 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Resistance to cold (50%), split, cannot be surprised
Move: 9/9 (climbing and swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

The amphisbaena is a giant poisonous snake about 10 feet long. It is
often found lairing near a water source or in dark, damp locations. An
amphisbaena moves on land by grasping one of its necks with its other head
and rolling across the ground like a hoop. The amphisbaena's poison is
deadly unless the victim passes a saving throw. Each of the amphisbaena's
heads functions independently of the other. An amphisbaena that is cut in
half continues to function normally (each with half its current hp)
and reattaches its body together in 1d2 days.

Twining the Fountain
This chamber is composed of massive granite blocks, each lovingly
cut into a perfect cube and stacked. The chamber measures roughly
12-ft wide and 12-ft deep and has a conical ceiling 15-ft tall at its apex.
A 4-ft diameter pool, raised about 2-ft above the beige-tiled floor has an
amphisbaena wrapped around it. A stream of water falls from the apex
of the ceiling into the pool. If the beast is killed and its blood drips into
the pool, the water will turn murky red and then freeze solid for mere
moments before it collapse into a pile of silver coins.

Credit: The Amphisbaena originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) as Snake, Amphisbaena and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Amphisbaena Basilisk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 bites (2d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Petrifying gaze
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

An amphisbaena basilisk is a single great lizard composed of two normal
basilisks conjoined in the middle. Each head's gaze can turns to stone anyone
meeting its eye. Fighting without trying to look at the creature incurs a -4
penalty to hit. If the amphisbaena basilisk's gaze is reflected back at it, it
has a 10% chance to force the basilisk into a saving throw against being
turned to stone itself.

Heads in the Clouds
Lazy coils of purple smoke roil from the 50-foot-by-30-foot room,
filling the chamber waist high with thick clouds. The smoke smells of
burnt lotus blossoms and is so thick it obscures the floor. The ceiling rises
15 feet over the thick mist. A 10-foot-tall statue of obsidian gilded with
gold leaf stands in the center of the room. The statue is a massive satyr
with two faces, one on each side of its head. It holds a cornucopia from
which the purple wisps pour. One face is smiling, while the reverse side
sneers. The purple smoke is harmless.

Curled around the base of the statue is an amphisbaena basilisk, with each of
its heads on opposite sides of the statue facing toward the single entry into
the room. The clouds obscure the creature's conjoined state, and it appears to
be two creatures with its heads down in the mists.  Hidden in the base of the
center statue is a compartment that contains 3 potions (levitate, healing and
gaseous form), 3 rubies (100 gp each) and a silver ring of mammal control
carved in the shape of a platypus.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Anemone, Great Sea
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: tendrils (paralysis)
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Acid cloud, swallow whole
Move: 0 (immobile)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

This gigantic flowerlike creature has a dark green to gray trunk and a
brightly colored interior. At the center of the creature's front is a circular
opening that leads into its interior. An anemone attacks any creature that
swims into its many tendrils with a paralytic poison that immobilizes prey
so it can be swallowed whole. A victim caught in the tendrils can save
to resist the paralysis. If a creature fails, the anemone swallows the prey
whole in the next round. If provoked, an anemone ejects the contents
of its stomach in an acidic cloud that deals 1d8 damage to all creatures
within 20 feet for 1d3 rounds.

Death Dive
A reef of jagged coral rises out of the surf, a deadly barrier shielding
the rich seabed for the pearl divers of Markees. The hearty divers raft
out into the deep water beyond the reef to swim deep beneath the azure
waves. A bed of oysters containing rare fist-sized crimson pearls is
located 40 feet beneath the waves.
A great sea anemone matured in the coral during the winter, however,
and snatches divers who get too close to the aquatic vermin. The anemone
appears to be a rock tube stuck near the base of the colorful coral, but it
quickly lashes out with its tendrils. Crimson pearls litter the sea floor
around the creature, as do the expelled bones of its victims. The pearls
can be sold for 100 gp each.
The devious divers want to get rid of the anemone, and are spreading
stories about a “mermaid stuck in the rocks” to get people to dive into the
dangerous waters.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

ANGELS

Angels are a race of celestials native to the lawfully-aligned outer planes.

Angel, Chalkydri
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: +2 flaming long sword (1d8+2 + 1d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 7
Special: Plane shift, spells
Move: 9/18 (flying)
Alignment: Lawful
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

This angelic figure resembles a muscular humanoid with
coppery skin and eyes. It has four large feathery, white wings
and carries a longsword swathed in fire. Chalkydri take their role
as protectors of good very seriously, and shift planes with ease,
jumping from one reality to the next to do so. They are powerful
spell casters (at will—bless, detect evil, dispel magic, invisibility
(self only), polymorph self, remove curse, cure disease, see
invisible; 3/day—cure serious wounds, flame strike; 1/day—
restoration, raise dead)

Purgatory of the Nexus
A thick door made from an unearthly green stone blocks access to the area
beyond. The looted remains of dozens of skeletons lie in heaps outside the
door. A cryptic epitaph etched in the stone reads:

Away from the sight of mortals, cast deep beneath the sward.  A gate that
seals the portal and a key forged from angel's sword.  The floor of the
60-foot-diameter cylindrical room beyond drops 30 feet down once past the
door. The ceiling rises 30 feet above the entry. A round, 30-foot-tall
pillar-like pedestal sits in the center of the room. The pedestal is 15 feet
in diameter and the top is level with the entrance door. A plinth holding
a small silver key sits in the exact center of the room atop the large
pedestal.  Kneeling before the key is a solemn chalkydri angel who holds
a sword in his hand. The blade has a small section carved from it that
perfectly matches the silver key. The angel does not respond or acknowledge
anyone standing outside the room. The angelic being attacks without reason
those disturbing the room, regardless of their alignment. The chalkydri was
tasked with protecting the key so that it does not fall into any mortal's
possession. Despite the key's normal size, it weighs 400 pounds. It unlocks
a gate to Hades in the city of Eminence.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Angel, Empyreal
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attacks: 1 weapon (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Radiant blast; immune to acid, cold and
petrification; resists electricity and fire; spell-like abilities
Move: 15/25 (flying)
Alignment: Lawful
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

Empyreals are powerful angelic warriors about 9 feet tall with silver hair,
blue eyes and dressed in shining armor. They have large, feathery, silver
wings and milk-white skin. Empyreals are fiery, quick-tempered, and forceful,
but always fair. To non-Lawful beings and Lawful creatures with fewer HD, the
empyreal appears as a column of white fire. Once per day, an empyreal can
increase its radiance to deal 8d6 damage to creatures within 60 feet, and
blind them for 3d6 minutes (save for half damage, avoid blindness). An
empyreal also radiates an aura in a 30-foot-radius that forces Chaotic
creatures to save before they can attack the angel. This aura grants Lawful
creatures a -2[+2] armor bonus.

Empyreals have a number of spell-like abilities: at will—continual light,
detect evil, dispel magic, invisibility (self only), remove curse; 2/day—
blade barrier, cure disease, cure serious wounds; 1/day—resurrection,
raise dead. Many can also cast spells as an 8th-level Cleric.

The Burning Angel
A column of white fire rises nearly 20 feet in the middle of 12 engraved
brass plates set in the marble floor. Each pie-shaped plate is 20 feet long
from the center flame to its outer edge, and the group forms a perfect
circle around the knight. The white fire burns slowly with a blinding light,
the overlapping flames flickering and receding in a slow-motion dance.
Within the burning fire, obscured by the semi-solid flames, stands a
warrior clad in shining plate armor decorated with swirling golden sigils.
Two feathered wings curl up from the warrior's back, the tips nearly
reaching the edge of the flames. The knight holds a crackling streak of
lightning shaped into a long sword in his hands. Kneeling on the ground
around the angelic knight are four brass figures, each holding a halberd
pointing inward toward the knight. The tips of the halberds just touch the
white fire sheathing the knight, and arcs of fire jump along their metal
bodies.

The knight is an empyreal angel named Jemichar who was caught in
a time trap during a battle more than 600 years ago. The angel landed
among the brass plates and was caught in a temporal moment designed to
repeat for 1,000 years. The brass plates originally burned at 1,000 degrees,
but the spell loses a degree of heat for each year that passes. Right now,
the plates burn at 400 degrees (4d6 points of damage to anyone touching
them).

The brass figures are 4 brass men tasked with keeping the angel in the
trap. The brass men attack anyone attempting to free the angelic warrior.
The brass men heal 12 points of damage each round they are in contact
with the brass floor plates. The angel can be freed by removing the runes
engraved in the plates by destroying the copper plates or otherwise marring
the sigils themselves. Each rune eliminated drops the temperature of the
plates by 10 degrees. When the plates no longer burn, the angel's stasis
lifts and Jemichar soars into the sky.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Angel, Monadic Deva
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  2 weapons (3d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Immunities, +1 weapon to hit, magic resistance
(60%), magical abilities
Move: 18/36 (flying)
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 18/3500

Monadic devas are angels with silvery wings that patrol the Ethereal and
Elemental planes. They serve as leaders and officers in celestial armies.
Monadic devas wield two maces +3/+5 vs. constructed creatures. They
are immune to acid and cold damage and death effects and suffer only half
damage from electricity and fire. Monadic devas can use the following
spells: charm elemental (per charm monster, but only affects elementals),
continual light, cure disease, cure light wounds (7/day), detect evil, dispel
magic, hold monster (1/day), holy word, invisibility (self only), mirror
image (7/day), polymorph self and remove curse.

Eternal Vigilance
In a long forgotten temple to the gods of Law, a lone monadic deva sits
in quiet contemplation of a shimmering, silvery pool set in the floor and
surrounded by glossy tiles of sapphire blue set with fire opals. Ensconced
on a throne of marble, he waits for the Intruder to once again attempt to
enter the universe through that pool, for the deva is a gatekeeper, pledged
for eternity to protect creation from something beyond and before and
alien to creation. The chamber holds several idols of lawful deities, all
hewn from marble and decorated with gold leaf. The deva is instantly
hostile toward chaotics that enter the temple, but is friendly enough to
lawful and neutral folk, provided they do not approach the silver pool.

Credit: The Monadic Deva originally appeared in Dragon #63 (© TSR/Wizards of
the Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Angel, Movanic Deva
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack: Weapon (3d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Immunities, +1 weapon to hit, magic resistance
(55%), magical abilities
Move: 18/36 (flying, swimming)
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2900

Movanic devas resemble broad-shouldered humans with silver hair,
white eyes, and large feathery silver wings. Relatives of the monadic
devas, they are usually found wandering the Positive or Negative Energy
Planes or the Material Plane. Movanic devas directly aid powerful
mortals when evil threatens the balance of the planes. In the celestial
armies, movanic devas serve as soldiers.
Movanic devas wield +1 flaming greatswords. Animals do not willingly
attack movanic devas, and plant creatures cannot and do not attack
them unless attacked first. Movanic devas can shift between planes at
will. They can also use the following spells: Anti-magic shell (3/day),
continual light, cure disease, cure light wounds (7/day), detect evil, dispel
magic, invisibility (self only), plane shift, polymorph self, protection from
normal missiles (1/day) and remove curse.

Rooting Out a Thief
One night, a squad of exceptionally handsome men and women with
sepia skin, glossy black hair pulled back and tied with saffron ribbons
and opalescent eyes enters an otherwise quiet inn. They wear coats of
gleaming mail and carry flamberges. After a quick survey of the room,
they fan out and begin asking patrons if they have seen a ruddy-skinned
merchant in these parts. While the men and women are charming in their
manner and graceful in their speech, they are also quite insistent and
rebuff all questions as to who they are or to the identity of their lord. They
focus their most intense questioning on the chaotic, but make sure to
question everyone in the place. The mysterious folk are actually movadic
devas, polymorphed to resemble normal humans. They seek a demon or
devil who has been plying the trade of soul stealer on the Material Plane
in these parts, but are having difficulty locating him.

Credit: The Movanic Deva originally appeared in Dragon #63 (© TSR/Wizards of
the Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

##ANIMAL LORDS
##
##For every animal species, there is a single ruler or lord, looked upon by
##those animals as a minor deity of sorts.  The animal lord is the master of
##that species; for example, there is a fox lord, mouse lord, and a cat lord.
##Each animal can assume two forms: human and animal. Its animal form is always
##of a member of the species it represents.
##
##Animal lords are seen as protectors of nature and animals. They may step in
##and prevent hunters from destroying a race of animals or foresters from
##completely decimating a forest. They do not, however, interfere with nature
##itself (i.e., animals die, they are killed for food or clothing)—such is the
##way of the universe.
##
##Animal lords are effectively immortal and nearly impossible to slay.  When
##slain, an animal lord's soul reforms on the Astral Plane. Within one week, it
##inhabits another animal of its type on the Material Plane and reforms. No form
##of magic (such as magic that would contain or trap her soul) prevents this. To
##permanently kill an animal lord, one must destroy every animal it commands in
##existence (so her soul has no creature to inhabit).
##
##Animal lords are immune to mind-affecting effects, including illusions.
##They can only be harmed by +1 or better weapons.

Animal Lord, Cat Lord
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 19
Armor Class: -5 [24]
Attack:  2 claws (2d6) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Change shape, howl, lick wounds, magic
resistance (95%), magical abilities, immune to mindaffecting effects, surprise on 1-4 on 1d6, +1 or better
weapon to hit
Move:   24/12 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 26/6200

There is only one. The Cat Lord is the Lord of All Felines. His natural
form is that of a black panther with dark, ruby eyes. He can assume a
human form, and in this form, he appears as a dark-skinned human with
black hair, chiseled features, and ruby eyes. In human form, he almost
always dresses in black. The Cat Lord spends his days roaming the
planes. The Cat Lord can speak the secret language of druids.

When the Cat Lord howls, all creatures except felines within a 20-foot
spread must succeed on a saving throw or be stunned for 1d2 rounds.
Once every 1d4 rounds the Cat Lord can spit a line of caustic saliva at a
single target to a range of 30 feet. A creature hit must succeed on a saving
throw or be blinded.

Twice per day, the Cat Lord can automatically summon 1d4+2 lions
or tigers, 1d4+4 leopards or cheetahs, 1d2 smilodons, 1d2 weretigers, or
30 + 1d20 (normal) cats. No felines, including chimeras, caterwauls, sea
cats, kamadans, tabaxis or feline lycanthropes willingly attack the Cat
Lord. The Cat Lord can speak to all such creatures.

Nine times per day, the Cat Lord can lick his wounds, curing 2d4 points
of damage. The Cat Lord can use the following spells: Astral spell (1/
day), detect evil, dimension door, ethereality (2/day, as the potion), haste
(2/day, self only), invisibility and teleport (1/day).

The Cat Lord sees five times as well as a human in shadowy illumination
and normal light and can leap up to 30 feet forward, backward or laterally
with minimal effort. The Cat Lord can communicate telepathically at a
range of 100 feet.

Pomp and Circumstance
With baited breath do the people of this bustling market town await the
coming of the Cat Lord, for his arrival has been presaged by the golden
tiger that only last week entered the town and took its place in the market
square. The yowling of a hundred cats announces his arrival, strutting in
human form down the streets, empty of humans and demi-humans but
swarming with cats of every shape and size, all come to pay homage to
their master. For centuries, the Cat Lord has come to this town to receive
tribute from the many feline tribes, each one sending their representative
with a choice prize. But this year, he wears a look of concern on his
face, for a new force has arrived in the town, something unknown but
worrisome to him, something that will have to be uncovered and stamped
out.

Credit: The Cat Lord originally appeared in Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards
of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Animal Lord, Mouse Lord
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: -5 [24]
Attack:  Bite (2d6 + disease)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Change shape, disease, magic resistance (95%),
magical abilities, immune to mind-affecting effects
(including illusions), surprise on 1-5 on 1d6, +1 or better
weapon to hit
Move: 24/12 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 21/4700

Like the Cat Lord, there is only one Mouse Lord, and she is the Lord (or Lady)
of all rodents. Her natural form is that of a large black-furred dire rat with
copper eyes. She can assume a human form and this form is almost always of
a female with darkened skin, raven-black hair, and copper eyes. She dresses in
robes of flowing silver or gray. The Mouse Lord spends her days roaming the
planes. She can speak the secret language of druids.

The Mouse Lord's bite causes black fever, which kills in 1d3 days unless
cured.

Twice per day, the Mouse Lord can automatically summon 10-100 rats or mice,
2d8 brain rats* or shadow rats*, 2d6 dire rats or barics*, or 1d4 dire shadow
rats*, ethereal rats*, or wererats, or 1d4+1 rat swarms.  The Mouse Lord can
speak to all of these creatures, and none of these creatures will willingly
attack the Mouse Lord, although they can be compelled to do so using magic.

The Mouse Lord sees four times as well as a human in shadowy illumination and
twice as well in normal light.  The Mouse Lord can use the following spells:
Astral spell (1/day), confusion, detect evil, ethereality (2/day, as the
potion), teleport (1/day).

The Circumstance
In a deep place, damp, pungent and unlit, the Mouse Lord reclines on
a couch of stone before a platform that supports a large, silver idol in the
shape of a rat, its carnelian eyes swallowed up by the darkness. She is
marshalling her forces, in this hidden recess beneath the caravan town,
unseen and unsuspected by the fools above. Tired of the persecution of
her people, the Mouse Lord has come to establish a new order, where rat
devours cat and humans bait no traps, instead leaving choice offerings on
their tables at night for their four-footed masters. Here she rests, a swarm
of rats around her ankles, awaiting news that the Cat Lord has arrived to
receive his final tribute.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley.

* These creatures may be found in this book.

Ant Lion
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (2d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Trap
Move: 12/6 (burrowing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

The ant lion is a vicious insect-like creature that resembles a giant gray
or brown ant with leathery skin covered in coarse, black bristles. Its deep,
inset eyes are black and its mouth is filled with rows of jagged teeth. Two
large silver mandibles protrude just above its mouth. Each mandible has a
barb on its inside midway between the creature's mouth and the end point
of the mandible. The ant lion lurks in the bottom of pits and holes feeding
on those unfortunates that fall in.

Ant lions dig deep, funnel-shaped pits in which to trap their prey. An
ant lion pit is about 60 feet across and about 20 feet deep. A creature that
steps on the pit must succeed at saving throw or slip and fall down into
the center of the funnel. It is there the ant lion waits, buried just under the
surface of the ground. When prey falls to the center of the funnel, the ant
lion surfaces and attacks, using its mandibles to grab and tear its prey.
An ant lion that gets a hold does not release its prey until either it or the
prey is dead.

A Handy Trap
The sandstone monuments poke out of the desert sands, so weathered
that they look to be part of the desert and inseperable from it. But a wise
sage knows that these crooked pylons are much more than they seem,
being as they are the fingers of a giant hand, a hand that awaits only a new
crystalline matrix to re-awaken and deliver to its new master all the lands
surrounding these butterscotch brown sands. What no sage could possibly
know is that the great stone hand holds a terrible danger in the form of a
large ant lion, its pit dug in the ruined courtyard just beyond those stone
fingers. There, the ant lion preys on hapless caravaneers who pass through
the fingers, anointing them with quinoa oil as the old stories say they
must to avoid the depredations of the ghouls that lurk on the windswept
expanses of the desert. Just a few feet beyond the old arch and into the
ruined compound, and one loses their footing and plunges into the 20-ft
deep pit and into the crushing mandibles of the ant lion. Mixed in with the
bones of llamas and merchants there is a considerable treasure.

Credit: The Ant Lion originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Apparition
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Spectral strangulation (see text)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Strangulation, detect living, incorporeal, sunlight
powerlessness
Move: 12/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Apparitions are undead spirits of creatures that died as the result of an
accident. The twist of fate that ended their life prematurely has driven
them totally and completely to the side of evil. An apparition is often
mistaken for a ghost or spectre. Apparitions hate all living creatures and
attack them on sight. Apparitions are ethereal creatures and they exist
mainly on the Ethereal Plane.

An apparition has no physical attacks and attacks by fear alone. By
implanting a suggestion in a victim's mind, it attempts to actually scare
the life out of its opponent. Once the apparition selects a target, it shifts
into the Material Plane and uses its spectral strangulation ability. If the
target fails a saving throw made to disbelieve in the attack, it dies of fright.
If the target succeeds at the saving throw, they are merely affected by the
fear spell. Any humanoid slain by an apparition becomes an apparition in
1d4 hours. Apparitions are utterly powerless in natural sunlight and flee
from it. An apparition caught in sunlight cannot attack.

The Mage's Fate
On that day twenty years ago, how could the old mage know he was
sitting down to his last meal? It had been a common enough day, filled
with researches into the recesses of the labyrinthine halls of the dungeon
and little real success - always more questions than answers. He and his
small retinue of apprentices had sat down around the old stone table in
the room they called the “Grand Tomb”. The table was made of marble,
with a sculpture worked into the top depicting a gaunt man in full armor,
hands clasped around a two-handed axe that extended all the way down
to his pointed feet. An oddity to be sure, for the mage was quite sure it
was not a repurposed sarcophagus lid - maybe a trophy memorializing a
fallen foe? There they sat, the hired man bringing in a platter of boiled
mushrooms they had discovered in a reeking cavern, a mismatched
collection of found goblets and tankards holding souring wine, hard tack
and salt pork spread out before them on the table. So involved were they
with the feast and a good natured exploration into the meaning of the
holes that dotted the floor of the Grand Tomb, they didn’t notice the hiss
of gas making its way through those holes, or the silent sliding of stone
doors into place blocking their escape. And so, they died, coughing and
hacking. And now, as soon as the party finds a way through that stone
slab, the brave adventurer will discover the final fate of that mage and his
apprentices, now 1d3+1 apparitions, still collected around the weird table
wondering what it all means.

Credit: The Apparition originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Underworld Oracle.

Arach
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 6 slams (1d6) or 6 short swords (1d6), 1 bite (1d4 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Poison, summon spiders, spells
Move: 12/6 (climb)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

This six-armed humanoid has a lithe build and stands just under seven feet
tall. They have narrow aquiline faces and bony plates protruding from their
thoraxes and limbs. Arach inject a poison with their bite, and may coat their
weapons with the same substance.  About 30% of arach are spell casters, able
to cast spells as a 6th-level Magic-user.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Spider Colony
The underground tunnel opens into a cylindrical chamber filled with hanging
vines and thick, twisted roots that drape down from the 50-foot-high ceiling.
Three tunnels exit the chamber in various directions.  Tiles inlaid in the
jade floor depict a massive spider overrunning a city as black flames lick the
night sky.  The spider's eyes are red tiles that glow brightly in the darkened
chamber. Spiders crawl in thick clusters through the roots and vines, and
thick balls of webbing hang among the plants.

A nest of 6 arach lives in a series of chambers accessed by a hidden doorway
40 feet off the floor.  The spider-like men and woman often lurk in the vines
like giant hunting spiders, suspending themselves by gripping the roots and
ivy in their six hands. The arach drop on unsuspecting explorers, and fight to
subdue victims to sacrifice them in a grand ceremony to the spider god of
destruction the tribe worships. The arach nest is decorated with spun webs,
and thousands of spiders crawl inside the wide tunnels.

Arcanoplasm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 acid slam (2d4 plus 1d6 acid + grab)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: acid (1d6), absorb spells, spell mimicry, immunities
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Arcanoplasms resemble giant pale yellow amoebas with “veins” of dark gray
striping.

Arcanoplasms are “tuned” to arcane magic and can detect magic-users within 100
feet. They can mimic any 5th-level or lower magic-user spell cast within 30
feet on their next action.  Any arcane spell cast is automatically absorbed to
heal 1 point for every 3 points of damage otherwise done (non-damaging spells
heal 1 point per spell level of the spell). Spells that affect an area are not
absorbed, but also don’t affect the arcanoplasm. Cleric spells affect the ooze
normally. Arcanoplasms are immune to poison, sleep effects, paralysis and
polymorph.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Glass Menagerie
The hallway opens into a 30-foot-by-30-foot room melted from within. The
walls, floor and ceiling bow outward as if a pressure wave of heat slammed
into them. Wall sconces droop like melted wax, the metal lanterns attached to
them nothing more than molten puddles running in gray streaks down the stone
walls.

Glass statues of cats, dogs and other wildlife sit on shelves or stand freely
about the room. Some of the life-size sculptures are incredibly detailed,
showing matted fur and antler scarring. The room gleams with reflected light
from the hundreds of statues, which range from small glass tree frogs glued to
the wall to a massive moose that dominates one corner of the chamber. All of
the glass animals are incredibly detailed sculptures, but nothing more.
A fine layer of dust collects on all of the animals.

Floating in the center of the room is a 5-footdiameter glass sphere whose
interior roils with yellows and grays. The sphere floats a foot off the floor,
and can be pushed around the room with ease.  There is a 1 in 6 chance that
anyone pushing on the glass shatters it accidentally. The yellow mass inside
the sphere twists and turns wildly whenever a magic-user comes within 5 feet.
This wild thrashing has a 1 in 20 chance of shattering the glass. Anyone
tapping the glass with a weapon shatters it instantly.

Trapped inside the sphere in an arcanoplasm that has been held captive for
nearly a year. The creature melted the room, but was then trapped in the
sphere by a magic-user named Chripat the Green. The effort cost the magic-user
dearly; he fell sick and died of his injuries before he could get rid of the
creature permanently.  The arcanoplasm is folded tightly upon itself inside
the glass sphere, and twists and turns unable to escape. It expands to fill
a 10-foot square if released.

Archer Bush
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Thorns (1d8)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Thorns
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

The archer bush is a subterranean, semi-mobile plant that looks like a
small mound of brownish-green leaves with pale buds of gold and purple.
It takes sustenance from the blood of living creatures. Hidden beneath its
trunk is the archer bush's mouth, which appears to be nothing more than
a dark recess or cavity. It attacks by firing a cluster of thorns at a single
creature that comes within 20 feet of its location. These thorns inflict 1d8
points of damage and impose a -1 penalty to hit and to saving throws until
removed.

A Way Out
A long, inclined passage leading toward the surface ends in a strange
chamber measuring 30-ft wide and deep and 40-ft from floor to ceiling.
The floor of the chamber is an inverted pyramid 15 feet deep with stepped
sides. The upper portion of the chamber is similarly shaped with a 5-ft
wide opening in the roof that appears to let in daylight. In floor of the
chamber is inhabited by a patch of 1d4+4 archer bushes as well as a few
pale vines bearing plutonic grapes (edible, but narcotic and with a deep,
sharp taste). While the hole in the ceiling appears to provide a way out
of the dungeon, it is actually a trick - just a few feet above the hole there
is a large, silver plate enchanted with a permanent light spell - a fairly
convincing illusion. The chamber is visited every few days by a gang
of kobolds who use silver flutes to put the plant monsters into a trance,
gathering any dropped treasure and picking a few grapes to turn into
black wine.

Credit: The Archer Bush originally appeared in the module B3 Palace of the
Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jean
Wells.

Ascomoid
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Run over or slam (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Run over, spores, resistance to blunt weapons, fire
and electricity (50%)
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Ascomoids are subterranean fungus monsters that exist on a diet of
living creatures. They appear as 10-ft diameter brownish-green puffballs
pocked by small dots that function as sensory organs. Ascomoids feed
by sitting atop a slain creature and absorbing its body fluids into its own
form. Creatures slain in this manner appear as rotting husks. Ascomoids
generally avoid light and the surface world, though they have no adverse
reaction to sunlight or bright light. They attack by rolling over its
opponents or slamming into them. Creatures that are run over or slammed
must pass a saving throw or be knocked prone. Ascomoids can also fire
spores at attackers. The spores have a range of 30-ft and billow into a
cloud with a 20-ft radius and 20-ft height. Creatures caught in the cloud
must pass a saving throw or suffer 2d6 points of damage. All creatures,
whether they save or not, are blinded and nauseated for 1d4 rounds.

The King's Sauna
Damp and musty, the tunnel lead downward towards a large, natural
cavern. As the tunnel approaches the cavern one notices whitish, downy
fungus covering the walls and floor. The fungus is occaisionally interupted
by small, tan puffballs that seem to quiver as people pass by. The cavern
is monstrously large, with sulfur encrusted cracks in the walls and floor
emitting a thin vapor that coats the cavern in moisture and allows fungus
to thrive. A second tunnel, really a subterranean riverbed, exits the cavern.
Dwellers of the underworld call this place The King's Sauna, referring
to the warm, moist air and to the cavern's only inhabitant, a massive
ascomoid. The ascomoid knows when people are approaching, and often
lies in wait for them on an inclined shelf near the entrance, waiting for
them to reach the center of the room, where the foot-wide cracks hinder
their movement, before attacking. Any treasure found littering the floor is
most likely tarnished or rusted unless made of gold, silver or stone.

Credit: The Ascomoid originally appeared in Dragon #68 (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards
of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Asrai
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 cold touch (1d6)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Chill touch, spells, water dependent
Move: 12/24 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

An asrai is a 1-foot tall female fey with long golden hair, slightly
pointed elf-like ears and pale blue skin. Her eyes are emerald or gold
and her features are delicate. Male asrai are thought to exist, though none
have ever been encountered. Asrai can’t leave their watery homes for
more than an hour. An asrai's touch chills opponents for 1d6 points of
damage. Asrai cast spells as 5th-level Magic-Users. Twice per day, they
can also cast create water and obscuring mist.

The Lady in the Lake
A small pond sits amid the rolling hills under a peaceful blue sky. Elms
sway in a gentle breeze. Frogs croak a natural melody and dragonflies
flit across the still waters. Fallen logs sit in a jumble on the pond's edge.
An overturned rowboat floats in the lake about 15 feet offshore. Its
wooden hull is scratched and battered, and small icicles of hoarfrost
drape off the boat despite the dale's warm weather. The lake is shallow
for about 5 feet along the edge, then drops to about 20 feet. The boat stays
in one spot, resisting the slight wind pushing against it. A long sword
with a gleaming golden hilt is thrust through the boat's wooden hull. The
weapon has a small red jewel on the end that pulses like a beating heart.
From the boat, a woman's voice pleads, “Help me.”
An asrai named Nemedia became trapped in this small pond as she was
traveling overland after drought forced the water creature from her river
home. She had hoped to move on by now, heading eastward in small hops
to a river about a day away. Her luck held until she reached this idyllic
pond.
The pond was already the hunting ground of 7 stirges that live in the
breakdown of fallen logs and in the trees on the edges of the pond. The
stirges attacked Nemedia as the exhausted asrai dove into the lifesaving
water. She was able to overturn a rowboat to shield herself from the flying
pests, but has been unable to escape.
Nemedia hides in the pond's deep water, but occasionally surfaces
beneath the rowboat to see if she might yet escape. She pleads with
rescuers to help, promising them riches. The sword is a phantasmal force
image she hopes will entice rescuers. The stirges refuse to let their meal
get away so easily, however, and attack if PCs move toward the rowboat.
The asrai takes any help offered, including being carried in a container
of water to the nearest river if PCs offer. If transported in such a manner,
she repays her rescuers by drawing them a map to a small treasure hoard
of 100 gp and 4 small rubies (50 gp each).
STIRGES (7): HD 1+1; AC 7[12]; Atk Sting (1d3 + blood drain);
Move 3 (Fly 18); Save 17; Alignment: Neutrality; CL/XP 1/15;
Special: Drain blood 1d4/round

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Giant Assassin Bug
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6) and 1 bite (1d8 + liquefy organ)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Liquefy organs
Move: 9/6/12 (climb/flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A giant assassin bug has a narrow head ending in a segmented beak or
proboscis. The 5-foot-tall creature's carapace is dull brownish-black and
its front jackknife legs are covered in thousands of small hairs. Two long
segmented antennae jut from its head. Assassin bugs are predatory insects
that feed on the blood and tissue of living creatures. An assassin bug has
two pairs of wings that it keeps folded against its back when not using
them to fly. The bite of an assassin bug injects a corrosive poison that
liquefies its prey's insides (save to resist).

Don’t Mess With Mama
In the depths of the Primian Forest, the trees grow in thick clusters with
conjoined canopies blocking the sunlight. Thick fronds catch the area's
scant rainwater and hold it in the tops of the trunks. The ground is dusty
and brown and dead. A giant assassin bug hunts in this seared wasteland,
running through the upper branches before leaping down to pin prey. The
creature has a clutch of young it protects in the hollow formed beneath a
couple of fallen oak trees. The body of a half-digested fighter lies slumped
over the log. His legs are still solid, but his torso a liquefied mess of soft
flesh and gooey organs. The three young assassin bugs leap to attack if
disturbed, but the real threat is their mother who viciously tears into any
creature approaching her nest and young.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Astral Shark
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Astral scent, sever silver cord
Move: 24
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Astral sharks are sleek, piscean creatures with blotchy skin of sickly
white and pink. They measure between 12 and 30 feet in length. Astral
sharks have jagged, slightly curved dorsal fins and large, bulbous, lidless
eyes that show no trace of pity. Astral sharks dwell on the Astral Plane,
sitting atop that weird dimension's food chain. They seem to be drawn
to the strange energies of visitors to the Astral Plane, relishing the silver
cords that connect an astral traveler to its material body. Astral sharks
can detect the presence of an astral traveler within 180 feet. When such
a traveler is detected, it streaks toward them and begins to circle, darting
in to bite with its powerful jaws. On a roll of a natural 20, the astral shark
manages to sever the traveler's astral cord, destroying its material body
and astral form.

Titanic Skeleton
Making their way across the great astral expanse, the adventurers might come
across a giant skeleton drifting aimlessly, almost gracefully.  Although it
might be mistaken for the bones of a storm giant, the skeleton actually
belonged to a young titan that fled battle with a great wyrm into the Astral
Plane, only to die there. A passing school of 1d4+1 astral sharks stripped the
titanic body of flesh, leaving only a few gibbets of amber colored meat,
shredded vestments and a smattering of treasure, much of it now floating in
the vicinity of the corpse. The sharks remain nearby, and there is a 2 in
6 chance per minute spent examining the body that they detect the presence of
visitors and attack.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Atomie
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Weapon (1d3)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Spells, magic resistance (20%), surprise on 1-2 on
1d6
Move: 15/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Atomies are among the smallest of the fey, looking like 1-foot tall elves
with gangly limbs and greenish skin. They dwell in arboreal regions, with
a single atomie family staking their claim to a single tree. Atomies are
attractive, especially when compared to other sprites. Atomie clothing
is almost always magical, made to change color with the seasons to
help hide the wearer during all times of the year. Atomies can cast the
following spells: Blink, entangle, invisibility (self), pass without trace
and speak with animals.

There Goes the Neighborhood
When the archduke laid siege to the baroness’ castle, he felled many
trees and heaped one depredation after another on the woodlands that
had housed a tribe of atomies since time immemorial. Fearing the iron
weapons of the soldiers, the 2d4x10 atomies have moved on, taking up
residence in a large forest of walnuts and wild apple trees. The people of
a small village have gleaned much of their sustenance from this forest
for years, grazing their swine in it and gathering walnuts and apples. The
atomie, having just been driven from their own lands, are in no mood for
sharing with humans and are thus doing their best to drive the humans
away - tormenting hogs, tying fairy knots in hair, petty theft, scouring
the woodlands of walnuts and apples, etc. The atomies have no leaders as
such, with each female among believing herself to be a queen, so some
of the creatures are against this campaign of terror and may be inclined
to help the hapless villagers. The tree top hovels of the atomie are woven
from fallen and living branches and very difficult to spot. The woods are
now filled with simple traps - small holes to turn ankles, arrows coated
with painful toxins and the like. At heart, the atomies do not wish to kill
the humans, just drive them away.

Credit: The Atomie originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Aurumvorax (Golden Gorger)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Rake with claws, surprise on 1-2 on 1d6, resistance
to fire (50%), immunity to poison
Move: 12/3 (burrowing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

The aurumvorax (also called the golden gorger) is an extremely vicious
creature that resembles an 8-legged badger with bright, golden fur. Only
3 feet long, aurumvoraces are extremely territorial, coming together only
rarely to mate. The aurumvorax attacks by biting a foe and holding on
with its powerful jaws. Victims of the creature's bite attack must pass
a saving throw to avoid being held in jaws and raked with four claw
attacks, each inflicting 1d4 points of damage. Aurumvorax feed on gold,
devouring the coins and using the gold to strengthen their bones and
stiffen their bristles. The pelt and bones of the animal are worth 2,000 gp.

Laying Claim
A grumpy old aurumvorax has made a lair for itself in a shallow, rocky
cave overlooking a small gully that holds a trickling river that is quite rich
in gold. More than a few prospectors have made the mistake of setting up
camp along the stream, all of them quickly run off by the territorial and
aggressive beast. This particular aurumvorax is now nursing a litter of
1d4+1 young. At the back of the beast's lair, one might find a tarnished
metal wheel with five spokes sticking up out of the rock. With some effort
(total strength score of 18) it can be turned to no immediate, obvious
effect. One turn after turning the wheel, one might discern a low rumbling.
1d4 rounds after that, the rumbling becomes a roar and a wall of water
sweeps down the gully, taking anything in its path with it and inflicting
6d6 points of damage on them. Folks in the cave will be drowned unless
they can fight the current and swim free. The deluge continues for 1d4+1
rounds before settling down and leaving a small, swift river in place of the
stream. The water comes from a dam constructed by the ancients about
twelve miles up river.

Credit: The Aurumvorax originally appeared in the First Edition Monster manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Babbler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6) and bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Surprise on 1-4 on 1d6
Move: 15/9 (bipedal)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Babblers are tall creatures that appear to a cross between a lizardman
and a gorgosaurus. They heave yellow scales, grey underbellies, and
large, strong tails that keep them balanced when they stand on their hind
legs. Most of their time is spent slithering on their stomach in search
of prey. The babbler is a carnivore and is quite fond of human, elven,
and dwarven flesh. They speak their own weird, gutteral language and
understand Common but cannot speak it. A babbler making a surprise
attack enjoys a +2 bonus to hit and damage.

The Babbler Step
A stepped pyramid has long stood in the midst of the marshlands,
rising from a shallow lake, the shores of which are choked with reeds
that pipe weird tunes in the frequent winds that sweep over the area.
The pyramid is constructed of large blocks of a chalky, ochre colored
stone, and though now very weathered, once were decorated with angular
glyphs of grimacing dragons and water lilies. At the top of the pyramid,
which stands about 60-ft tall at the pinnacle, there is a small altar stained
with wine and blood, for this pyramid was dedicated to an elder god who
granted euphoria and madness in exchange for sacrifices. A hidden catch
on the altar causes it to slide slightly, revealing a narrow flight of steps
that winds its way into the heart of the pyramid.
The steps finally end in a large chamber lit by etheric orbs of light that
bob gently on the surface of a dank, slimy pond. The pond is connected
to the outer lake via submerged tunnels. Once a holy place to the lizard
men who ruled these lands in ancient times, it is now occupied by the
descendants of the priests who presided over that final sacrifice that
helped tear down the wall between the Material Plane and the pocket
dimension of Agothustlaat. A pack of 1d3+1 babblers lairs in this pond,
relaxing in the cool waters and awaiting the day when the stars realign
and Agothustlaat can return to our world.
A small hole drilled through the wall allows a small beam of light to
enter the pond chamber. When the beam of light strikes the sapphire (300
gp) eye of a bas-relief of a reptilian priest in full regalia on the opposite
wall, the babblers will know it is time. A copper urn, sealed with wax,
holds the sacrificial robes and knives of the babbler priests. A secret door
in the cavern leads to a narrow hallway lined with small cells wherein are
chained a number of human and demi-human captives taken in raids on
surrounding settlements. The prisoners are kept alive on a diet of swamp
roots and raw fish, and two have already perished.

Credit: The Babbler originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Jeremy Goodwin and Ian McDowell.

Baccae
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6) and 1 bite (1d4) or 1 weapon (1d10)
and 1 bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: beast form, charming gaze
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Baccae are attractive women with long flowing, rich, red hair and
emerald green eyes. They wear billowy white robes emblazoned with
archaic symbols and runes and stand between 5 and 6 feet tall and weigh
around 120 to 130 pounds. When enraged or intoxicated, baccae become
beastlike and attack with weapons, fangs and claws. When in human
form, any creature withon 30 feet meeting their gaze must save or be
charmed (as per the spell).

Wild Things
The forest's thick plants and clinging thorns give way to a strange sight:
Six women wearing little more than silk scarves tied strategically around
their bodies dance in unison around a proud stag in the middle of the
leaf-covered clearing. A bonfire of aromatic wood sends a thin stream
of smoke across the dancers. Their flesh glistens with a fine sheen of
sweat as they dance. The leader is a tall woman with rich red hair and
emerald eyes who moves a half-second ahead of the dancers, directing
the bacchanalia.
If interrupted, the dancers halt immediately, and the stag bounds away,
vanishing into the forest with a chaotic stamp of hooves and thrashing of
its pronged head. The 6 baccae invite PCs to join their dance. Red wine
is freely offered, and the women consume as much as their guests. PCs
notice the changes in the women almost immediately as they become
more bestial and belligerent, and the dance becomes wilder and more
passionate.
The baccae have one enemy in the woods, however, a black-furred
gang of 4 ruthless werewolves who hide in the woods waiting to end the
dancers’ revelry. These ruffians burst out of the forest intent on slaying
the women, and any guests they encounter.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Banderlog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (1d6) or club (1d6) or coconut (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Coconut throwing
Move: 15/12 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

The banderlog is a somewhat intelligent baboon-like primate with
grayish-brown fur that makes its home in warm forests and jungles.
Though it appears as a larger version of the common baboon, it does
not keep company with or associate with normal baboons. Banderlogs’
intelligence allows them to form small tribal communities for protection
and companionship. The leader of such a community is usually the largest
and strongest banderlog of the tribe. Banderlogs sustain themselves on a
diet of fruits and nuts, with coconuts being their favorite food. Though
omnivorous, they rarely eat meat of any sort. Unaggressive unless
threatened, banderlogs prefer to attack from a distance using small rocks
or coconuts. They can hurl these projectiles up to 50 feet.

Banderlog Barque
A grand barque, the property of a noblewoman from the coast, has
run aground on a sandbank near the bank a great jungle river. The
barque ventured up the river in search of a great treasure, a treasure
guarded by sinister powers who did not wish it found. One terrible
night, these guardians descended from a moonless sky and killed
or carried away the barque's entire complement.
The abandoned boat has now been taken over by a a pack
of 6d4 banderlogs and their 1d2 leaders (6 HD each). The
banderlogs have occupied themselves by dismantling just
about everything they could get their hands on, swinging about
on the slack ropes, tearing up the sails and feasting on the
provisions below decks. The captain's cabin, fairly doused in
blood, still holds a treasure map stuck to a table with a dagger.

Credit: The Banderlog originally appeared in the First Edition module S3
Expedition to the Barrier Peaks (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1980) (as the
baboonoid) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of
the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Baobhan Sith
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 9 [11]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d4) and 1 bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Blood drain, captivating dance, dying words, spelllike abilities
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A baobhan sith appears as female elf with pearl white skin, golden or
brown hair, and eyes of emerald, blue or hazel. Her figure is sleek and
curved and she moves with a cat-like grace. By entrancing creatures with
their dance, they lure men to their deaths. Those who see her dance must
make a save, or become enthralled for 2d4 rounds. Once a target is
captivated, the baobhan sith moves in and drains its blood with a
bite (1d4 points of damage). When slain, the baobhan sith curses
her killers with her dying words. At will, baobhan sith can detect
thoughts and cast plant growth and suggestion.

The Prism Prison
A 100-foot-diameter reflecting pool of clear water fills
this forgotten temple. Plants grow wildly about the room
from golden planters, creating a jungle of vegetation
within the building. Ten mirrored columns surround the
pool, each rising to the arching ceiling 40 feet overhead.
A gurgling fountain of water jets upward in the center of
the pool, splashing against the sides of a 15-foot-diameter
clear crystal sphere hovering above the pool. Within the
crystal is a pale elf with golden hair and delicate features.
She is dressed in a sheer gown that flows over her slender
body like a waterfall.
The woman is a baobhan sith imprisoned by her sisters for
leading a female warrior into their valley. If PCs approach
the pool, the trapped baobhan sith begins dancing. The crystal
prison reflects the dance into the water and onto the pillars,
forcing anyone looking at any of these reflective surfaces to
save or be charmed by the woman's seductive movements. Any
charmed PCs are attacked by 8 baobhan sith hiding in the thick
vegetation.
If the crystal is shattered, the baobhan sith within is freed and
flees.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Barbegazi (Ice Gnome)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Spell-like abilities, snow move, immune to cold, fire
vulnerability
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Barbegazis – also known as ice gnomes – stand about 3-1/2 feet tall
and have white hair and long flowing whitish-blue beards that appear
to be made of icicles. Their skin is pale and glossy-white and their eyes
are deep blue. They have large, flat feet and never wear shoes. They are
perfectly adapted to live in the coldest regions, and can walk on deep
snow without being slowed. Once per day, a barbegazi can cause metal to
freeze using a variation of heat metal. They are also able to shoot shards
of ice from their hands (cold variation of burning hands, 1/day) to stop
attackers.

Making Tracks
Two run-down wagons sit in the middle of the frozen
wasteland, their battered wooden sides covered by
thick polar bear pelts to keep out the cold. A weak fire
burns in the middle of deep snowdrifts, the logs barely
flickering with tiny licks of flame. The camp is empty,
although boot prints from about six human travelers
lead off into the trees.
The camp is a trap laid by a group of 8 barbegazi
thieves journeying far from their Wailing Glacier
home. The small band is wanted by their village for
stealing a diamond idol that supposed to keep the
Wailing Glacier from melting. The small group fled
their village and has been robbing travelers for supplies
as they stay a step ahead of the bounty hunters hired to
return the idol.
The barbegazi hide in hollowed-out snowdrifts with their
2 polar bear pets. The polar bears pull the wagon when the
barbegazi travel. The human tracks leading out of the camp were made
using wooden boot shapes the barbegazi strap onto their smaller feet to
mislead travelers.
One of the wagons contains a fist-sized diamond carved to look like
a small white dragon wrapping itself around a frozen icicle. The idol is
worth 500 gp, but the barbegazi of the Wailing Glacier have hired agents
to seek out and return the relic. They look harshly on anyone trying to sell
the stolen relic.
POLAR BEAR (2): HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk 2 claws (1d6+1), 1 bite
(1d10+1); Move 12; Save 9; CL/XP 7/600; Special: Hug.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Baric
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  2 claws (1d3) and bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Barics look like giant 6-legged rats with black fur
and yellow eyes. They have long, duck-like bills lined
with rows of needle-like teeth. The average baric is 3
feet long and weighs 50 pounds, though they can grow to a
length of 7 feet and weigh about 150 pounds. Some races keep
barics as pets, though more often than not, these unpredictable monsters
turn on their masters within a short time of entering captivity.

Rat Pack
A pack of 1d8 barics has been placed into suspended animation within
a large, long, silvey cannister. The cannister's origin is unclear, though it
bears many dents and scuffs, as though it has come a long way. It is now
resting in the midst of a large, vaulted cavern, having been carried there
by the warriors of a tribe of troglodytes, their shaman having declared it a
god when a patrol discovered it in the surface swamps.
The cannister can be opened by the turning of dials found on one end
of the cannister. The dials are encrusted with dried muck from the swamp
and one of them is damage, requiring a thief to succeed at an open locks
roll at a -15% penalty, or not penalty if assisted by a magic-user with
a read languages spell. When opened, the end of the cannister simply
falls off, as though severed, ending the suspended animation and setting
the barics loose on an unsuspecting world. Inside the cannister there is a
thick layer of red dust and a treasure of 1d4 x 100 oblong gold coins in
a leather sack.

Credit: The Baric originally appeared in the module B3 Palace of the Silver
Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jean
Wells.

Basidirond
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Slam (1d8 + spores)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Hallucination cloud, spores, immune to cold
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutral (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Basidirons are fungal creatures that resemble inverted umbrellas with stems of
dark green or brown hanging beneath it. The inside of its coneshaped top is
inky black. The basidirond stands 7 feet tall, and is believed to be related
to the ascomoid (q.v.). It makes it lair in very dry underground caverns. The
basidirond attacks by striking with its cone-shaped cap or by releasing
a cloud of spores . This cloud of spores measures 20 feet in radius. Creatures
within the cloud must succeed on a saving throw or be affected as by
a confusion spell for as long as they remain in the cloud plus 1d4 rounds
after leaving the area. A new save must be made each round a creature remains
within the affected area. (For more specific hallucinations see the sidebar
text.)

Rather than affecting an opponent as by a confusion spell, you can randomly
determine hallucinations for each creature affected. The duration remains the
same as detailed under the creature's special attack.

===== ==========================================================================
d8  1 Basidirond Hallucination Cloud
===== ==========================================================================
**1** Individual believes he is in a swamp and strips off gear and armor to avoid sinking.
**2** Individual believes he is being attacked by a swarm of spiders. He attacks the floor and surrounding area.
**3** Individual believes item held has turned into a viper; drops item and retreats back from it.
**4** Suffocation—Individual believes he is suffocating and gasps for air and clutches throat.
**5** Individual believes he has shrunk to 1/10 normal size. He begins yelling for help.
**6** Individual believes his associates have contracted a disease. He will not come closer than 10 feet.
**7** Individual believes he is melting; grasps self in attempt to hold together.
**8** Individual believes his back is covered with leeches. He tears armor, clothing, etc. from his back to get at them.
===== ==========================================================================

A basidirond's slam attack transfers smothering, poisonous spores to its
opponent. A creature struck must succeed on a saving throw or smother in 1d4+1
rounds unless a cure disease spell is cast on them. A basidirond takes no
damage from a cold effect, but is slowed (as the spell). During this time,
a basidirond cannot use its poisonous spores or hallucination cloud special
attacks.

Fungus Among Us
As you proceed down the tunnel, you notice the air becoming warmer
and drier, working you into a lather and parching your throat. After a few
more yards, you hear the screams of a madman echoing down the tunnel.
They grow louder and louder, and no more than a minute later you catch
sight of an adventurer in chainmail running towards you screaming about
“the spiders”. If one attempts to stop him, he flails wildly for a couple
rounds before coming to his senses. Otherwise, he continues running past
the adventurers into the dungeon.

If calmed down, the man describes 1d3 weird fungal creatures with long, brown
tendrils and a cone shaped bodies dwelling in a large cavern about
100 yards ahead. The cavern is horseshoe-shaped and measures about 300 feet
from entrance to exit. It is terribly warm, caused by a volcanic vent that
passes through the inner cavern wall and filled with bones, dozens of pieces
of armor and weapons and a thick layer of dried fungus - either husks of the
creature's “young”, or flakes from its own body.

Besides any other treasure that might litter the area, the dried husks are
valuable for brewing a bitter, nauseating tea that is said to give one the
ability to see through illusions for up to one hour after drinking it.
Imbibers of the tea will find that these rumors are true, but they must also
pass a saving throw at +4 or lose their minds (per a symbol of insanity
spell).

Credit: The Basidirond originally appeared in Dragon #68 (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.

Basilisk, Crimson
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8 + acid)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Acid bite, blood frenzy, wounding gaze,
camouflage
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A crimson basilisk is about 6 feet long and weighs over 400 pounds. Its
skin is dull crimson though it can easily change its color to match that of
its surroundings. Its eight legs are thick and stout and end in sharpened
claws. The spines on its back are crimson as well, though they tend to be
darker than its overall body (especially in males). Its eyes glow with a
ghostly blue light. A crimson basilisk's saliva is corrosive, dealing 1d6
points of acid damage with each bite. Any creature within 30 feet that
meet's the creature's gaze must save or lose 1d4 hp as their blood
weeps from their eyes, ears, nose and mouth. A crimson basilisk that
detects fresh blood within 30 feet enters a frenzied state that gives it a
+2 to-hit bonus.

Tears of the God
The 20-foot-tall head of a statue sits on the ground. There are no clues
to the whereabouts of the rest of the statue. Blood continually drips over
the surface of the unknown bearded god, weeping from its hairline where
a stone crown sits and down its cheeks and chin. The entire area reeks
of rotting gore, and years of draining blood saturate the ground around
the stone head. Clouds of flies swarm the area, driven by bloodlust. The
blood pours over the head and coalesces in cracks and crevasses, creating
a dramatic chiaroscuro effect on the white marble head. The flowing
blood gives the statue the appearance that it is crying.
The blood is actually from the prey of a crimson basilisk that nests atop
the stature in a natural hollow inside the stone crown. The crimson
basilisk normally stays atop the statue to sun and devour its meals;
otherwise, it is off hunting for prey and mates. Down-on-theirluck locals sometimes journey to the statue to make offerings
of meat and fruits to the god. Sometimes they do not return.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Basilisk, Greater
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8 + poison) and bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Foul breath, petrifying gaze, poison
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

Greater basilisks are larger, more vicious cousins of the normal basilisk.
They are 12-foot long reptilian monsters with dull brown skin, yellow
underbellies and eyes that glow with an eerie, pale green incandescence.
Sages believe the greater basilisk hails from the Elemental Plane of Earth.
In combat they rear up on their hind legs and slash opponents with their
poisonous claws while also using their deadly gaze attack. The beast's
poisonous claws inflict an additional 1d4 points of damage with each hit
unless a successful saving throw is made. The breath of a greater basilisk
is so foul that all creatures within 5 feet must succeed on a saving throw or
take 1d4 points of damage each round they remain in the area. A creature
need only succeed on this saving throw once to avoid further damage
from the poisonous breath.

The greater basilisk's petrifying gaze has a 50-foot range. Those it looks
at must succeed at a saving throw or be turned into stone. The greater
basilisk is near-sighted and must be within 10 ft. of its reflected gaze to
suffer the same fate.

Life-Giving Water
A mated pair of greater basilisks has made its home in a series of
howling caverns in a wasteland of red sandstone and stunted creosote
bushes. The entrance to their maze-like lair is partially obscures by large
boulders. Within the caverns, the wind causes a constant roaring and
whistling that makes it impossible to hear the greater basilisks moving
about. The greater basilisks usually lie motionless within their caverns,
allowing them to surprise opponents on a roll of 1-2 on 1d6. There is
about a 25% chance that one or the other is in their lair, and a 10% chance
that both are in their lair.
The beasts are careless about where they devour their prey, so bits
of armor, clothing, weapons, treasure and clothing as well as petrified
adventurers can be found throughout the caverns. In the heart of the
caverns there is an ancient druidic altar composed of a wind-shaped
boulder surrounded by the burned remains of the creosote and painted
with shamanic symbols.
A depression in the top of the altar holds crystal clear water that can
reverse the petrifying gaze of the basilisks if applied to the victim within
10 rounds of being turned to stone. A small mirror lies in the bottom of
the basin.

Credit: The Greater Basilisk originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Bat, Doombat
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack: Bite (1d8) and tail (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Shriek
Move: 3/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

caves both small and large. Nobody living has ever ventured into these
caves, for they are exceptionally difficult to reach and the stories that
have passed down from past generations report they they are barren
and useless. The highest cavern is not completely barren, though, for it
connects to much deeper tunnels and vaults wherein dwell many colonies
of doombats.
Should the bell in the tower ever ring again, at nightfall the cavern will
belch forth 1d4+4 of these terrible creatures to wreak the necromancer's
final vengeance against the village. And in the vault from whence the
doombats come, there is a weird idol of spongy, grey stone that is warm
and pulsating to the touch. The idol depicts a petty and forgotten god, and
it holds a large, perfect sapphire (worth 2,500 gp) that serves as a mystic
key to release that forgotten god from its extradimensional prison. All that
must happen is for sapphire be bathed in the blood of an innocent and then
shattered by a doombat's shriek.

The doombat is a giant black bat with glowing yellow eyes. It is a nocturnal
hunter that desires living flesh to sustain it. The doombat has a 10-foot
wingspan, though specimens with wingspans reaching 25 feet have been
reported. The approach of a doombat can be heard long before the creature
arrives on the scene, the yipping growing louder as the doombat draws
closer. When a doombat yips, all creatures (except other doombats) within
a 100-foot spread must succeed on a saving throw or suffer a -1 penalty on
attacks rolls and saving throws for the duration of the battle. The yipping
is constant, and spellcasters in the area must succeed on a saving throw
anytime they attempt to cast a spell. The effect of several doombats yipping
at once is not cumulative. Doombats use echolocation to pinpoint creatures
within 120 feet, allowing them to attack invisible opponents at no penalty.

Credit: The Doombat originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Julian
Lawrence.

Doom, the Bell Tolls
When the errant knight in the scarlet tunic emblazoned with a golden sun
killed the old sage in the belltower, things in the village began to improve.
The rains stopped, the sun shone strong and the animals, drawn and lean,
fattened up almost immediately. The people became hale and healthy as
well, and the old belltower, home of the curious sage who turned out to
be a necromancer, was bricked up. All the people remembered well the
final curse on the necromancer's lips - when next the bell rings, doom will
come from the skies.
The necromancer wasn’t just whistling Dixie. In the grey peaks that
loom over the lush meadow valley of the village, there are a number of

Bat, Mobat
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw:  13
Special: Sonic screech
Move: 9/15 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Mobats are large, brown bats with razor-sharp fangs and green, glowing
eyes. The mobat has a wingspan of approximately 15 feet. It is a nocturnal
creature, cruising silently through the night sky in its never ending quest
for food. A mobat can blast an ear-splitting screech that affects all within
a 20-foot spread. The screech stuns any creature in the area for 1d3 rounds
if it fails a saving throw. Mobats use echolocation to pinpoint creatures
within 120 feet, allowing them to attack invisible opponents at no penalty.

With This Ring
A colony of 2d4 mobats has been making a nuisance of itself to the
people on the jungle's edge, ever since a mysterious, exotic woman was
carried into the village by a hunting party. The woman has been locked in
a deathless sleep since found, and the villager's now suspect that she is
a witch calling the mobats to attack their livestock. The local priest finds
this unlikely, but knows that the people's fear and anger cannot long be
supressed.

The people are not entirely wrong. The mobats do search for the
woman, who escaped from a reclusive wizard's tower with a magical ring,
swallowing it to hide it from him. She is now in the grip of the wizard's
curse, the ring attracting the mobats, the largest being the polymorphed
wizard.

Credit: The Mobat originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Beast of Chaos
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack: 2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Frightful presence, rage, immunities, magic
resistance (25%)
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A chaos beast resembles a lion with dark, blackened fur, razor-sharp
fangs, and oversized paws that wield sharpened claws.

When a beast of chaos growls, roars, hisses, or makes any other sound
common to its animal type, all creatures within 30 feet that hear it and
those with fewer HD than the beast of chaos must succeed on a saving
throw or become shaken for 5d6 rounds.

In the presence of bright light, a beast of chaos flies into a berserk
rage, attacking until either it or its opponent is dead. It gains a +1 bonus
to hit and damage while enraged. If the source of light is removed, the
creature's rage ends 1d4 rounds later.

Beasts of chaos are immune to confusion, fear, hold animal, hold
monster, slow, and haste.

Chaos in the Savannah
When a party of adventurers toppled the blackened idol of the Ancient
Traveler, the chaotic deity of the savannah, they unleashed a potent green
mist that flowed across the landscape, tainting the grass and trees and
twisting a pride of lions into beasts of chaos. The 1d6+5 lions now dwell
in the shade of the fallen idol, collecting shamans from the savannah
tribes and depositing their bodies into the hole from whence came the
mists. The hole is the incarnate stomach of the Ancient Traveler, and the
victims fuel his manifestation in the Material Plane.
The idol was 30 feet tall and up to 15 feet wide in places. The pieces of
the idol (there are eight) now sprawl across the savannah. The grasses in
the area have turned crimson and the trees are the color of jaundiced flesh,
their leaves scarlet and oozing a weird sap (causes confusion to those who
touch or taste them unless they pass a saving throw).
At the bottom of the hole of green mists, there is a pool of green acid. It
is currently inhabited by seven wights, the risen remains of the shamans
dropped into the hole by the beasts of chaos. The wights bear scars from
the beasts and their legs and arms are twisted into weird angles.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Bedlam
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 slams (2d4)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Chaos burst, immune to polymorph,
spell failure
Move: 30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A bedlam is a semi-amorphous, nearly vaporous
creature composed of pure chaos. The creature
has no set shape or form. Every minute or so
its form changes from that of a smoky gray
and vaguely humanoid figure with arms,
head, and torso to a swirling mass of
grayish-black chaotic matter crackling
with bluish-gray energy. A bedlam
can unleash a burst of energy against
nearby opponents for 4d8 damage
(save for half). Spells fizzle around
a bedlam, with magic-users needing
to make a save to successfully cast
a spell.

Rest in
Peace and Quiet
Pilgrim House was a place of
screams and insanity until about
a week ago. The asylum sits on a
hillside overlooking Dalerest, with
wrought-iron gates keeping patients
inside. Thick climbing streamers
of ivy cover the fence, and azaleas
planted by the insane surround
the three interconnected buildings’
granite foundations. The manor house
is eerily silent, however, all of patients
cowering in fear or whimpering silently
in far corners by themselves. They run if
approached. At night, the usual screams
echoing through the hospital's halls are
replaced by eerie silence.
An old man with wrinkled skin, a long white
beard and scrawny legs walks half-naked through the
yard around the hospital. He wears a gold “crown” made
of folded paper on his head. Grubal Norton struts around
the yard, having a grand old time. The patients either run from
him or drop to the ground and grovel at his feet. He wears an assortment
of rings on his toes and has a woman's silk scarf wrapped around his
wrist. Norton was admitted to the hospital against his will more than a
week ago when he was found dancing naked in the street with a bearskin rug. If PCs approach the old man, he puts his finger to his lips and
shushes them.
Norton considers himself the emperor of Pilgrim House. As royalty,
the screams of the other patients offend him. One of the worthless rings
Norton wears on his toes is a dimensional prison that contains a bedlam
in its opal depths. Norton's anger every sleepless night calls the bedlam
forth, and the creature enforces the old man's wish for silence. The other
patients know to keep quiet or face the bedlam's deadly torments. The
creature floats freely through the manor halls at night looking for people
making too much noise. Anyone angering Norton or touching the old man
immediately draws the bedlam out of its dimensional lair.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Beetle, Giant Blister
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Blister spray, immune to poison
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Blister beetles are 3 feet long with slick, dark green carapaces. Their
legs are dark green or black and their mandibles are serrated, and black
or green in color. When they snap them together, their mandibles produce
an audible clicking sound that can be heard up to 10 feet away. When
attacked, the beetle releases a foul stream of oily liquid up to 20 feet that
irritates an attacker's skin (1d3 damage, save avoids).

Blister Pack
The ground in a 20-foot-wide clearing is burned and blackened. A
rotting, hollow tree trunk lies on the ground, its entire side bubbling
with a green syrupy liquid. Other trees standing around the clearing are
missing bark on the sides facing the clearing. Grass around the edges
of the clearing is withered and brown. A giant sunflower lies across the
clearing, its stem burned in half. A giant bee lies crushed beneath the
fallen flower. The upper half of the bee has been burned away. The entire
area smells of nail polish remover.

A giant blister beetle colony lives under the clearing. The opening into
their colony is inside the fallen tree. Two beetles wait for creatures to
enter their clearing, then spray the area with their oily blistering liquid
through holes in the hollow trunk. They rush out opposite ends of the
tree to attack, clicking their mandibles to bring other insects from the
underground nest. The Game Referee should adjust the number of beetles
to fit the Challenge Level of the PCs.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Beetle, Giant Boring
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (2d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Hive mind
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Giant boring beetles are 9-foot long, with greenish-gray carapaces
and wing-covers and black legs and mandibles. They feed primarily on
wood, mold, fungus, and other organic matter and make their lairs inside
ancient tunnels and caverns, where they harvest and grow molds and
fungi. Shriekers are prized for both food and their use as alarms to warn
the boring beetles of intrusion. Boring beetles are about 9 feet long. All
boring beetles within 1 mile of each other are in constant communication.
If one is aware of a particular danger, they all are. If one in the group is
not surprised then none of them are.

Boring Temple
The temple that is supposed to hold the shinbone of Saint Alyssa of
the Black Rose sank into the ground more than a century ago, sinkholes
being common along the coast. The people merely filled it in with rubble
and rebuilt, and for years never ventured into the dangerous corridors and
crumbling rooms of the old temple, trusting that its inaccessibility would
keep the relics safe.

But now, as a weird plague sweeps along the coast and strikes down
man, woman and child indiscriminately, the priests have decided the
holy reliquary must be recovered. To their dismay, they have discovered
that the old temple has become something of a hub in the underworld. A
tribe of venemous kobolds has moved into the old kitchen and turned the
old fire pit into a place of sacrifice in honor of whatever minor demonic
functionary they’re worshipping this week.

The catacombs are now crawling with a hive of 1d8+10 giant boring
beetles. The catacombs connect to the ancient crypt, the center of the
beetles’ hive. The vaulted crypt is now filled with all sorts of weird, pale
fungi, including 2d4 shriekers. The sarcophagus of Saint Alyssa and the
reliquary have not been harmed.

Credit: The Boring Beetle originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.


Beetle, Giant Death Watch
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Death rattle, immune to death spells, surprise on a
1-4 on 1d6
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1700

This creature appears as a giant beetle with a dark green carapace and
wing-covers. Its body is covered in leaves and sticks. Its mandibles are
silver and its legs are black. The death watch beetle makes its lair in forests
and uses a mixture of saliva and earth to stick rubbish (leaves and twigs, for
instance) to itself in order to attack by surprise. Once every hour, a death
watch beetle can vibrate its carapace to produce a clicking noise that sets
up vibrations in all creatures within 30 feet. Affected creatures with 6 HD
or less must succeed on a saving throw or die immediately. Creatures with
more than 6 HD or those that succeed on their saving throw take 4d6 points
of damage. Since the effect stems from the vibrations set up in a victim's
body and not from the clicking noise itself, silence offers no protection
against this attack. Likewise, a creature that cannot hear can still be affected.


Death Pyramid
The natives have always considered the valley hemmed in by the cliffs
of white chalk to be a sacred, taboo place. To visitors, it appears to be little
more than a gentle woodland of tall pines. The valley is abundant in game
and the air here is always crisp and cool. In the midst of the valley there is a
crude pyramid built of pale yellow chalk blocks, heavily weathered. What
carvings still exist depict dancing skeletons and large scarabs.

A very narrow tunnel leads into the pyramid, which stands 30 feet tall and
measures 20 feet on each side. The narrow tunnel leads downward, slightly,
ending in a circular shaft open to the sky and also descending into a little
cavern that holds a floating globe of wan light. When touched, this globe
emits a sound inaudible to human beings that attracts a death watch beetle
that lives nearby.

The death watch beetle will creep towards the pyramid and then lie low in
a shallow, natural pit, its body covered with leaves and sticks. In this
position, it will wait until the blasphemers come close enough to use its
death rattle and then strike. The globe of light can be moved by touching it
with a slim wand of knotty pine. It gives out light equal to a full moon and
acts as a protection from evil spell.

Credit: The Death Watch Beetle originally appeared in the First Edition
Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Beetle, Giant Rhinoceros
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Bite (2d8) and gore (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Trample (3d6)
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

Giant rhinoceros beetles are 12-foot long beetles with grayish-brown
carapaces and wing-covers and a large brownish-black “horns” between its
mandibles. They are found in the warm jungles and forests of the world and
spend their days searching for plants, fruits, and berries on which to sustain
themselves. Giant rhinoceros beetles can trample smaller creatures by simply
moving over them, inflicting 3d6 points of damage (save for half damage).
All would be well with this situation were it not for the jungle goblins,
mean-spirited little men with long green mustaches and broad, bald heads
marred by scars and liver spots. The goblins like a good prank, and their
acqisition of fire powder has given them the idea that a few well placed
explosions in the beetle pen could make for a jolly afternoon.

Fun With Explosions
For generations, the jungle people have kept the trading lanes clear with the
use of a swarm of 1d6+5 semi-tamed giant rhinoceros beetles. The beetles are
controlled by priestly maidens using long sticks scented with fragrant herbs.
Slaves armed with sickles are connected to the beetle's carapace via long
chains and neck collars, sweeping away the choking underbrush of the rain
forest while the beetle topples trees and trods things underfoot.
The beetles are kept in a large enclosure - a pit surrounded by a wooden
palisade, with their handlers living in long houses outside the enclosure
and slaves living in subterranean chambers beneath the beetle enclosure.

Credit: The Rhinoceros Beetle originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Beetle, Giant Saw-Toothed
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Grab
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A giant saw-toothed beetle has oversized serrated mandibles to chew
and crush its food. These creatures are about 6 feet long. Their wing
covers and carapace are silvery-green in color and have a dull sheen.
Their legs are long with spiraling bands of green and black. Its compound
eyes aid it in detecting creatures moving close by, though it usually relies
on motion and scent to pick up its prey. If a serrated beetle hits with a bite,
it holds the prey in is massive mandibles, automatically inflicting 1d6
damage in the next round until the creature is freed.

Where the Trail Ends
A foot-deep carpet of colorful leaves covers the forest floor, the twisted
trees standing bare above the multi-hued landscape. A wide path has been
gouged recently through the leaves, the muddy trench dug a foot into the
wet earth. The ragged trench wanders drunkenly from left to right along
the path. The trench dead-ends in the middle of a clearing amid a stand
of old oaks.

The center of the clearing where the trench stops is a 10-foot-wide pit
that drops 15 feet straight down to a dirt floor in a 30-foot-wide chamber.
Seven tunnels lead underground from this central room. The pit opening
is covered by a lattice of small branches, leaves and chewed bark. At the
bottom of the hole, a dead giant saw-toothed beetle lies in a crumpled
heap. Part of its head is split by a sword stuck in the insect's serrated
mandibles. Dirt cakes the large mandibles, and its carapace is covered
with burns. The dead beetle returned to its nest, dragging its mandibles
through the forest. Other saw-toothed beetles in the nest replaced the leaf
and twig pit covering, but have yet to dismember the dead insect. The
sword has a jewel-covered hilt and is worth 200 gp if sold.
Living in the tunnels are 6 giant saw-toothed beetles that pour out to
attack anyone who falls into the pit. The insects climb out of the pit to
attack creatures wandering around the clearing.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.


Beetle, Giant Slicer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (3d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Vorpal bite
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

This creature appears as a giant beetle with a triangular head and two
long, razor sharp mandibles. Its body is black in color. It closely resembles
a large stag beetle and is often mistaken for such. However, the slicer beetle
is more aggressive than the stag beetle. The creature dines on carrion, fresh
meat, and leaves. Slicer beetles are about 10 feet long, but can grow to
lengths of 20 feet or more. If a slicer beetle scores a natural 20 on its attack
roll and its victim fails a saving throw, it severs one of the opponent's
extremities (roll 1d6: 1-3 arm, 4-6 leg; 50% chance of either right or left).

Credit: The Slicer Beetle originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.

Thistledown Justice
It isn’t that the baron is not mad, but he certainly is not as bloodthirsty as his
enemies would have people believe. Dwelling in his little, ancient stronghold
on the craggy hill in the Thistledowns, he and his people herd sheep, and
grow grains and bitter herbs, produce a fine, soft cheese from ewe milk and
do their best to discourage visitors. The Thistledowners, as they are called,
are an insular people who follow the old traditions, including trials by ordeal.
Within the baron's shell keep there is a deep pit that serves as the lair of a giant
slicer beetle called “The Sword of Justice” by the locals. The slicer beetle is
well fed on offal and straw, and therefore doesn’t always attack when a criminal
is dropped into the pit. They must stay in the pit for a few minutes based on
the severity of the crime they allegedly committed and either come out intact
(proving them innocent) or having lost a limb. The limb is then roasted on a fire
as a sacrifice to the goddess of justice and the crime is duly forgotten.
The beetle is one of a mating pair, the “stallion” being kept in a similar
pit located quite far from the stonghold to avoid potential burrowing.

Beetle, Giant Water
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Stench spray, aquatic
Move: 6/24 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

left too long in the sun. The smell wafts over the water and seems to rise out
of the logs. Three logs in the middle of the span are rotten, the wood eaten
through from below. The upper surface of the bridge over this rotten section
is extremely brittle. Anyone stepping on the center logs splinters the wood
and steps right through the bridge deck into the water below.
A colony of giant water beetles lives underneath the bridge, protecting a
queen that has chewed the logs open and frequently crawls inside the wet
wood to deposit her eggs. The water beetles float in the water like logs,
but submerge to attack anyone in the water.
The cheese smell is from the corpse of a halfling traveler who fell into the
water a day ago and was killed by the giant beetles. The little man was carrying
a sack full of cheeses to sell in a nearby market. His body is crammed into the
hollow within the logs, and his leather pack reeks of cheese. The beetles put
him into the crevice to feed the young water beetles when they hatch.

The highly aggressive giant water beetles average about 6 feet long though
they can grow to a length of about 10 feet. Their body is cylindrical and
hydrodynamic, tapering into a pointed tail section. Their body shape allows
them to move rapidly through the water and also aids them in hunting,
allowing them to dive quickly through the water when a target is spotted.
Typical coloration is black or dark brown with their wing covers following
their body coloration. Some species of giant water beetle have yellow legs
or a silver stripe on their dorsal side. Females are slightly larger than males
and have a red band around their front legs. They rarely come on land, and
never venture far from a water source. Once per minute, a water beetle can
eject a foul-smelling liquid from its abdomen that sickens creatures nearby.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Cheese Log
A bridge built of 8-foot-diameter tree trunks roped together side-by-side
floats low on the placid surface of Whisper Creek. The water is 30 feet deep
and 300 feet wide. The bridge is shaky, but two ropes at waist height on either
side of the 8-foot-long logs allow a person to stand upright while crossing.
The logs are lashed together with a series of ropes and leather straps.
The 15-foot-center section of the bridge smells horrible, like moldy cheese

Beetle, Requiem
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 claws (3d6+4) and bite (2d8+4)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Constrict, earth-shaking
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4,400

The gigantic requiem beetle has a dark red carapace, blackish-red wing
covers, and black legs. Two large claw-like pincers protrude from its
front to slash and rip the air around the creature. Its oversized mandibles
are dark reddish-black. Requiem beetles measure about 40 feet long and
weigh about 18 tons. A requiem beetle that hits a single opponent with
both claws automatically constricts for 5d6 points of damage. Whenever
a requiem beetle moves more than 10 feet in a round, all creatures within
10 feet must save or fall down as the earth shakes.

Potato Beetles
Buffalo Bur is a small mountain settlement situated in a quiet cove.
Fields of wild potato plants surround the village. Countless beetles swarm
over the land and congregate in and around the town. The beetles cover
virtually everything in Buffalo Bur in inches-deep layers throughout the
streets and inside dwellings. The beetles envelop the building like a thick
living blanket, and the constant drone of clicking of legs and buzzing
wings drowns out most noise. Although the beetles are slow to react, if
agitated they fly en mass, obscuring vision until they settle down in about
1d3 hours.

This plague of beetles moved into Buffalo Bur overnight nearly two
months ago. Although harmless, the number of beetles creates unsettling
and unlivable conditions in Buffalo Bur. The villagers fled, unable to
defend the town against the insurmountable beetle swarm. The beetles
devastated the crops and contaminated the water, and the constant drone
and large amount of pheromones in the air drew a much-larger relative to
the devastated landscape. A requiem beetle now resides in a large potato
barn on the far side of town. The beetle burrowed up from below the barn
to feast on the stored potatoes. The barn sways and groans as the requiem
beetle moves within the rickety wooden structure.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Belabra (Tangler)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Slam (2d6) or 12 tentacles (1d2) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Acidic blood, tentacle barbs
Move: 3/9 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Belabras resemble a man-sized flying jellyfish with a hard, chitinous
shell and twelve long tentacles. Four thin, pupil-less eyestalks protrude
from its cap. A small, bird-like beak is hidden among its array of
tentacles. Its cap is blackish-gray and its eyestalks are dark gray. They
dwell in deep forests and thick undergrowth and sustain themselves on
a diet of plants, berries, and rodents. Particularly hungry belabras will
attack larger creatures, such as humanoids. Each time a belabra is hit with
a slashing or piercing weapon, all creatures within a 10-foot radius must
succeed on a saving throw or be sprayed by the creature's acidic blood.
A creature that fails its save is partially blinded and overcome with fits of
sneezing. Both effects last 1d6+2 rounds. An affected creature takes a –4
penalty to hit, –1 penalty to AC, loses its Dexterity bonus to AC (if any)
and moves at half speed. All checks relying on vision have a 50% chance
of failing. A belabra's tentacles are lined with razor-sharp barbs. Anytime
a grappled creature attempts to break free and fails, it takes 1d4 points of
piercing damage from the barbs.

Air Jelly Baby
On a long, inaccessible ridge there lives an old belabra who fancies
himself the “lord of the woods”. Although solitary by nature, the old
tangler has spent the past five years raising a lost human toddler he calls well, belabra is almost impossible to write down in any meaningful way,
but he calls the child something like “Zzzikikik”. The child has become
an expert at climbing and swinging and hunting, and he and his tutor
dwell in a treetop nest of woven branches and twigs, protecting their
domain from incursions by goblins, orcs and other humans.
Zzzikikik, who fights with a gnarly club studded with discarded belabra
barbs, wears a teardrop shaped sapphire worth 500 gp, the only link to his
parents, exiled nobles who were cast into the wild by an ambitious and
wicked aunt. His adopted father is never far from him.

Credit: The Belabra originally appeared in the First Edition Creature Catalog
(Dragon #94) (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1985) and later in the Second
Edition Monstrous Compendium (MC 3) (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1991) and is
used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ed
Greenwood.

Bhuta
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Death grip
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

When a person is murdered, the spirit sometimes clings to the Material
Plane, refusing to accept its mortal death. This spirit, called a bhuta,
possesses its original body and seeks out those responsible for its murder.
It will never rest until those responsible are sought out and slain. Since the
transformation into unlife is almost instant (occurring within 1-2 hours
after death), the bhuta appears as it did in life for about 2 weeks, taking
on a more decayed appearance thereafter. Close inspection (spot on a roll
of 1-2 on 1d6) reveals slight decay, and the body still shows signs of
any trauma suffered prior to death (wounds, disease, burns, or the like),
but outwardly, the bhuta for the most part appears as a normal creature
of its race. In its undead state, the bhuta sustains itself on a diet of flesh,
preferring that of humans and elves. A bhuta that scores two successful
claw attacks on an opponent in the same round fastens its hands around
its opponent's throat and deals 1d6+1 damage per round until the hold is
broken with a successful attack by the victim. The bhuta's main objective
is revenge on the person that killed it. So long as the bhuta and its killer
are on the same plane of existence, it can find its target unerringly.

Wine (and Moan) Cellar
It was twelve years ago, twelve dark years, that the countess ended
a night of debauchery by toppling into an open well. Her husband, a
knightly rake known mostly for his womanizing and misfortune at the
card table, immediately had the well sealed and a small memorial in her
honor built nearby and then took the throne and coronet and began his
rule as “the wastrel count”.
It was a neat piece of work by the count, for his ex-wife's corpse, now
risen as a bhuta, is physically incapable of getting through the seal. If she
could, or if anyone was inclined to move the seal, they would discover
a pallid, rotting corpse in an expensive gown with a deep slash across
her throat (no doubt suffered in the fall) with vivid wine stains down her
frock. Her jaw was shattered in the fall, and thus is capable of little more
than a gibbering moan. The countess was wearing about 2d8 x 100 gp
worth of jewelry when she fell into the well.
A secret door in the bottom of the dry well connects to secret tunnels
to a wine cellar that was walled in a hundred years ago and is itself only
accessible via a secret door in the friary, the friars being inclined to raid
the wine cellar on special occaisions. The present count is unaware of
these secret passages.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Biclops
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12+2
Armor Class: 2[17]
Attacks: 2 weapons (4d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Hurl boulders
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A biclops appears to be a filthy ettin, but has one eye in the center of
each ugly head. They are feared by less intelligent monsters such as hill
giants and trolls, whom they beat to death on sight. They throw two rocks
for 3d6 points of damage.

Two Heads are Better than One Eye
Angry voices rise into shouts from behind a plank leaning against the cave
opening. Two voices shout at one another and the sounds of meaty fists hitting
flesh can be heard clearly behind the makeshift door.  Beyond the door is
a truly odd sight: a biclops sits with its back against the rock wall, its two
heads arguing loudly. The right head wears a pirate's eye patch over its lone
eye, leaving it blind, while the left-side head shouts for a turn as the hand
on that side of its body tries to grab the patch of black cloth. A giant club
leans against the wall near the creature. A pirate's body lies battered and
broken at the giant's feet, the corpse's head crushed into the floor. The
feathery remains of a green parrot are punched into the rocks behind the
biclops.

Lotney the biclops killed the pirate, but the two heads decided they wanted to
wear the man's eye patch. They are quick to remove it if PCs enter the room,
so the giants can see to attack. The eye patch can wait until the biclops sees
what other interesting toys these new visitors carry – and what the two heads
can argue over.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Bleeding Horror
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack: Axe of Blood (2d6) or 2 claws (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Blood consumption, horrific appearance, +1 or
better weapon to hit, magic resistance (10%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

Created by the axe of blood, these foul undead creatures drip with the
blood they were so willing to sacrifice to the hungry blade. They are filled
with the unquenchable desire for blood to feed the weapon that created
them. Bleeding horrors appear as skeletons or sunken corpses covered in
and continuously dripping thick red blood. Their eyes glow with a desire
for blood. They may wear armor and wield weapons.

A living creature within 60 feet that views a bleeding horror must
succeed on a saving throw or take 1d6 points of strength damage. This
damage cannot reduce a victim's strength below 0, but anyone reduced to
strength 0 is helpless.

When a bleeding horror successfully hits a living opponent with a claw
attack, it heals a number of hp equal to the damage dealt. However,
it can’t gain more than the subject's current hp, which is enough
to kill the subject. A bleeding horror can’t gain more hp than the
maximum hp allowed by its Hit Dice.

If a bleeding horror hits an opponent with both claw attacks in a single
round, that opponent suffers catastrophic blood expulsion, taking 1d4
points of constitution damage. A successful saving throw reduces the
damage by half. For each point of constitution damage dealt, a bleeding
horror gains 4 temporary hp. Any creature slain by the blood
consumption attack of a bleeding horror becomes a bleeding horror in
1d4 minutes under the command of its creator.

If the axe of blood is taken from a bleeding horror before the creature is
destroyed, it can find it unerringly.

Minor Artifact: The Axe of Blood

The axe of blood is rather nondescript, being made of dull iron.
Only the large, strange rune carved into the side of its doublebladed head gives any immediate indication that the axe may
be more than it seems. The rune is one of lesser life stealing,
carved on it long ago by a sect of evil sorcerers. This is, in fact,
the only remaining copy of that particular rune, thus making the
axe a valuable item. Further inspection reveals another strange
characteristic: the entire length of the axe's long haft of darkwood
is wrapped in a thick leather thong stained black from years of
being soaked in blood and sticky to the touch. When held, the
axe feels strangely heavy but well balanced, and it possesses a
keenly sharp blade.

Until activated, the axe is just a +1 battleaxe. The wielder must
consult legend lore or some other similar source of information
to learn the ritual required to feed the axe. Despite the gruesome
ritual required to power the axe, the weapon is not chaotic but
is instead neutral. Bound inside it is a rather savage earth spirit.
The axe draws power from its wielder in order to become a
mighty magic weapon. Each day, the wielder of the axe can
choose to “feed” the axe, sacrificing some of his blood in a
strange ritual. This ritual takes 30 minutes and must be done at
dawn.

Using the axe, the wielder opens a wound on his person (dealing
1d6 points of damage) and feeds the axe with his own blood. The
wielder sacrifices blood in the form of hp. For each 1d6
hp sacrificed, the wielder gains a +1 bonus on attack rolls
and weapon damage rolls with the axe (to a maximum of +3). Hit
points sacrificed to the axe cannot be healed magically, but heal
at the rate of 1 point per day. Similarly, the damage caused by the
opening of the wound may not be healed by any means until the
sacrificed hp are regained.

There is a chance that the hp sacrificed to the axe is
lost permanently. If the wielder always skips a day in between
powering the axe and always powers the axe with the morning
ritual, there is no chance of permanent loss. If, however, the
axe is fed on consecutive days, there is a 1% chance plus a 1%
cumulative chance per consecutive day the axe is powered that
hp sacrificed to the axe on that day is permanently lost.
If reduced to 0 hp as a result of feeding the axe, the
wielder becomes a bleeding horror.

Axe Murderer
When the dwarf warlord finally completed his quest and took possession
of the axe of blood, he wasted no time in beginning the ritual to empower
the axe with his own blood. Unfortunately, he fell to the axe's influence
and is now a bleeding horror himself. His comrades soon fell to his axe,
and were the first members of a rapidly expanding army of bleeding
horrors. The warlord now commands thirty bleeding horrors drawn from
kobold, orc, goblin and ogre tribes.
On the third level of a dungeon, the remnants of several humanoid
tribes has managed to block the bleeding army behind several collapsed
passages. They are trying to dig themselves out and threaten to engulf the
civilized lands beyond the wilderness if they escape the dungeon. The
humanoids, as chaotic as they are, will not refuse help from powerful
adventurers. They know of a secret way into the sixth level of the dungeon
(via an air shaft), so that they might come up behind the bleeding army
and destroy it. The ogres will even send two or three of their number
along to help.

Copyright Notice: Authors Clark Peterson and Scott Greene.

Blindheim
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Eye beams
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Blindheims are 4-foot tall frog-like humanoids with large, bulbous eyes that
constantly emit bright yellow beams of light. A blindheim's skin is mottled
yellow, growing darker across its back. Its feet are webbed as are its claws.
Blindheims dwell in underground caverns and sustain themselves on a diet of
fungi, molds, and small rodents. An extra eyelid allows the blindheim to “turn
off” its eyes when it is sleeping or resting. A dead blindheim's eyes are dull gold
in color. A blindheim can turn its eyes on and off as it wishes, but always leaves
them on during combat. When open, the eyes emit a 30-foot cone of light. It can
see normally in this light and functions normally in areas of magical darkness. A
creature looking at a blindheim when its eye beams are “on” must succeed on a
saving throw or be blinded for 1 hour.

Blind Intersection
A gang of 1d3+1 blindheims has taken up residence in a crystaline cavern. The
interior of the cavern is highly irregular, with massive crystal columns
jutting from the floor, some going from floor to ceiling, and thousands of
smaller, multifaceted crystals embedded in the walls and in between the larger
crystals.  The blindheims dwell on a crystal shelf about 20 feet above the
floor of the cavern, what treasures their victims have dropped being found
either on the shelf or just below it. The cavern is usually pitch dark, and
the mirrored crystals make navigating the cavern difficult with torch or
lantern light. When the blindheim's turn on their lights, it becomes downright
dazzling, requiring adventurers to make a saving throw to avoid suffering a -2
penalty on attack rolls due to the glare.  The cavern contains 1d6 x 1,000 sp,
1d4 x 100 gp, four lion skins (worth 25 gp each) a pink pearl worth 115 gp and
magical horseshoes of speed.

Credit: The Blindheim originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Roger
Musson.

Blood Bush
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 4 tendrils (1d4), 6 flower darts (1d2)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Paralysis
Move: 0
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A blood bush is a 3-foot-tall flowering bush with a thick trunk and small
whip-like branches. Each branch is topped with a blood-red flower and
deep, rich green leaves. A victim hit by a dart must make a saving throw
or be paralyzed for 1d6+1 rounds.

Unsafe Haven
A decaying mausoleum rises out of the forest. Crumbling columns
surround the stone structure, and the faces of singing angels are worn
away by the elements. Bushes blooming with red flowers grow abundantly
around three stone steps leading up to the gravesite's sealed marble door.
The word Haven is carved into the stone. A warm golden light filters out
of cracks in the stone façade. The light is cast by a crystal globe held in a
gold-colored statue's outstretched hands. The globe and statue are coated
with yellow mold. The globe casts a radiant but heat-free light in a 20foot radius. Three stone crypts are filled with brittle bones.
The bushes surrounding the crypt are 6 blood bushes. Bones from past
victims poke out of the dirt around the mausoleum's foundation.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Lance Hawvermale.

Blood Hawk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: None
Move: 6/36 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

The blood hawk is nearly identical to a normal hawk and is often
mistaken for one, but it is stronger and far more aggressive than a normal
hawk and has red talons and a dull red beak. Blood hawks love the taste
of human flesh and are relentless in their hunt of human prey. They often
steal gems from the corpses of their humanoid prey, which they use to
line their nests.

Predator or Prey?
A haggard and motley collection of hobgoblins is holed up in
a shallow cave, a small fire pit having been dug just outside the
cave entrance and several conies now roasting above in on a
spit. The hobgoblins are on guard, but have no pickets posted,
apparently being worried about leaving the cave.
Visitors soon discover the cause of the hobgoblin's worries
if they remain in the open for more than a few moments.
A flock of 1d6+5 blood hawks dwells on the ledges above
the cave, nesting in natural alcoves dug into the
stone. The lowest of the nests is 60 feet above the
floor of the valley, the highest about 120 feet up
and easily 80 feet below the cliffs above.
In one of those nests lies the golden crown
(worth 250 gp) of the hobgoblin king, studded
with jewels and stolen not three days ago from
his head while he was hunting. The clans are
gathering in a week's time, and the loss of the
crown could mean the loss of his position. The
15 remaining hobgoblins sent to retreive the crown have
failed on several attempts to reach the nests, and are
considering fleeing into the wilderness. They might be
open to some assistance.

Credit: The Blood Hawk originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian
Livingstone.

Bloodsuckle
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 tendrils (1d4), limb rake (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Blood drain, create host, grab, summon host, seed
Move: 0
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A bloodsuckle is a nightmarish bush consisting of a bulbous root from
which sprout several vine-like tendrils. The tendrils end in hollow, needlelike points and can reach lengths of 60 feet. Woody limbs as thick as a
human's leg sprout from the trunk of the bloodsuckle. The leaves of a
bloodsuckle bush are a vile greenish color, and constantly ooze a sticky sap
that reeks of decay, filth, and other unmentionable odors. Bloodsuckles are
semi-intelligent. immobile plants that gain nourishment from the blood of
living creatures. A bloodsuckle injects its sap into a host using its tendrils
so it can control the creature to attack others or approach the plant to drain
its blood. If a bloodsuckle hits a victim with both tendrils, it automatically
begins draining the creature's blood (1d4 hp per round). Once per
month, a bloodsuckle can generate a walnut-sized seed that it implant's in a
host's body. The host is then sent away, and a new bloodsuckle sprouts in the
victim in 1d4 days. If threatened, the bloodsuckle can produce a high-pitched
whine that draws nearby hosts to defend it.

Out to Pasture
Farmer Gertie knows that the cows are out to get her. She's seen
them plotting to kill her. Every time she goes out to milk them in the
morning, they look at her funny, like they were just talking about her and
she interrupted them. They watch her every move, never mooing, and
sometimes turn their heads as if listening to an unheard voice. A voice
even she can’t hear … and she hears lots of voices.

She's sure the cattle are plotting something. And don’t you pay no mind to
farmer Johnstone down the road, who says she's just been working the back
forty in the sun too long. He's the one who samples the smelly
grain alcohol he cranks out on his little backyard still.

Gertie's concerned now that 3 cows from her herd wandered off without a trace.
She's not seen them for two days, and she's concerned they’re out cavorting
with Johnstone's bull.  The cows stay in the barn at all times, when they
leave, they do so in a single line all headed in the same direction. The
bovines stare down anyone who enters the stalls, never making any sound.
Bloody marks are visible along each cow's flank.

A little over a week ago, the cows stumbled into a bloodsuckle patch in
Gertie's back field, and the plant is using the animals for food and
protection. Two of the missing cows are protecting the patch, while the third
was drained of blood and lies dead in the bloodsuckle patch.  And Gertie was
right, the cows are cavorting with the bull in the next pasture, but only
because it is also under the bloodsuckle plant's control. The bull comes
running if the plant is threatened.

BULL: HD 4; AC 6[13]; Atk gore (2d4), trample 1d6; Move 12; Save 13; CL/ XP
4/120; Special: double damage from charge

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Bloody Bones
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  4 tendrils (see below) and 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Tendrils, slippery, resistance to fire (50%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Bloody bones are evil undead spirits that haunts caverns, caves, and
other desolate places. Their true origins are unknown, but they are
believed to be the undead remains of those who desecrate evil temples
and are punished by the gods for their wrongdoings. It appears as a
skeletal humanoid with bits of muscle and sinew hanging from its body.
Four long, sinewy tendrils writhe from its midsection. The entire creature
constantly oozes a mixture of blood and mucus. Its eye sockets are hollow
and show no pupils. A creature hit by the monster's tendril attack must
pass a saving throw or be held fast and dragged toward the bloody bones.
The bloody bones’ tendrils have 10 hp each and an AC of 3 [16].

Bloody bones are difficult to wrestle or snare due to the constant flow of
blood and mucus across their bodies. Webs, magic or otherwise, do not
affect bloody bones, and they usually wiggle free from most other forms
of confinement.

Bloody Pirates?
The people of the coast had long since become accustomed to the
coming of the Black Galleass with the headless figurehead and its buff
colored sails.. Framed by a blazing sunset, it would make its way to the
coast and disembark a small launch carrying a basalt idol of the demon
prince of evil sea creatures. Accompanied by men swathed in black and
shuffling as though chained, the idol would be carried through a town
preceeded by a tall man with golden eyes carrying a large urn. Coins
would be placed into the urn by those wishing to avoid the attention of
the demon prince and the village elders would make whatever gift they
could of stores and supplies. The priests would carry their idol back to the
launch and then their ship would disappear over the horizon for another
happy year.
What a surprise, then, to find the galleass grounded on a windswept
beach littered with the detritus of the sea. Listing slightly, its hull buffeted
by the crashing surf, it lies there with not a sign of its rowers or priests.
Closer inspection, of course, reveals a grisly scene - bodies strewn about
the deck, their clothes and hides cleaved by axe blows. The carnage
continues below decks, with the remains of a few skeletal rowers still in
evidence, though most seem to have been blasted away by a divine fire.
The most terrible surprise, however, lies in the ship's shrine, located
in the aftcastle. A shield, white and bearing a red cross, lies shattered
outside the door and a thick spear holds the doors to the shrine open.
Inside, in front of the toppled idol, are 1d4+1 bloody bones, still wearing
the tattered surcoats that would identify them as crusaders. Although they
succeeded in destroying the temple ship of a demon prince, they could not
resist the ire of the dark gods with which that prince was allied.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Boalisk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Constrict, gaze
Move: 9/9 (climbing, swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A boalisk is a constrictor snake 12 to 30 feet long with dark scales
interspersed with pale green and yellow daubs of color to help it blend
in with its surroundings on the forest floor. The eyes of a boalisk are
large and reddish in color. They dwell in misty jungles and along dark
riverbanks. Boalisks have a powerful bite attack. Victims of a successful
bite attack must succeed at a saving throw or be ensnared by the serpent's
coils and constricted for 1d8 points of damage per round. The boalisk's
more potent ability is its terrible gaze. Those within 30 feet that meet the
boalisk's gaze must succeed on a saving throw or contract black rot. Black
rot strikes at a victim almost immediately, causing the skin to become
black and glossy and terrible swelling in the joints and face. Each day,
a victim of the rot loses 1d6 points of constitution and charisma if they
fail a saving throw. The disease persists until the victim succeeds at two
consecutive daily saving throws. A victim of the disease dies when their
constitution reaches 0. A recovering victim regains 1 point of charisma
and 1 point of constitution per day of rest.

Quarantine
Tromping up the jungle trail that follows the lazy river into the highlands,
you come across an old trading post of timber and stone. The trading post
is two stories tall and looks abandoned at first blush. Dozens of barrels
and crates lie outside the post, filled with basic trade goods and supplies.
As one approaches, a voice will call out to them, weak and mournful.
“Come no closer,” it says, “we have been invaded and the black rot is
upon us. Take what you will and leave only your prayers.”
Three days earlier, a boalisk crawled into the post, bringing with it the
black rot and making a meal of a halfling trader. The others managed to
escape to the second floor and bar the door. They do not know whether
the serpent remains, but know that the disease will soon claim the last of
them. The barrels and crates stores on the second story were thrown out
in case folk came upon the post - better not to waste supplies in such a
hostile country. The boalisk is now lodged between two water barrels on
the ground floor, patiently waiting for new prey to enter the post.

Credit: The Boalisk originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Bog Beast
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6 + swamp fever)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Swamp fever, rend with claws
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

alligators are not terribly bothersome. The bog beasts serve the impetuous
and often cruel dryad of the cypress, bringing her young fishermen that
they kidnap from the nearby settlement of humans.
Most of these unfortunates are wracked with disease by the time they
reach the cypress, and thus are not pleasing to the dryad and are quickly
cast away into the mud of the swamp. The leader of the bog beasts is a
barbaric individual with +2 HD who fights as a berserker. He carries a
massive club constructed from the jawbone of a black dragon that he
claims he killed with his bare hands (a lie - he found the body rotting in
a small pool).
The bog beasts have 1d4 x 1,000 sp, 1d4 x 100 gp, a rhodochrosite
worth 70 gp, a brass broach shaped like a salamander swallowing its own
tail worth 95 gp and a limestone statuette of a knight worth 1 gp.

Bog beasts make their homes in bogs and swamps and feed on creatures
that dwell there. They are avid hunters and a bog beast's hunting area
usually covers a large expanse of ground several miles around its lair. It
makes its lair amid overgrown swamplands and attacks just about any
creature that travels too close to its lair. They are large humanoids with
shaggy fur and clawed hands and feet. Two, long, upright tusks protrude
from its mouth. Its eyes are dull brown and its fur is brownish-yellow. A
bog beast stands over 9 feet tall and weighs around 1,100 pounds. They
seem to be able to communicate with one another through a series of
guttural grunts and growls, but do not speak any known language. If a bog
beast succeeds on both claw attacks against an opponent, they rend for an
additional 2d6 damage. Characters who suffer damage from a bog beast's
claws must pass a saving throw or come down with a case of swamp
fever. The fever causes swelling of the joints and fills the lungs with fluid.
The diseased character's movement rate is cut in half and they suffer a -2
penalty to AC and saving throws. Each day, they receive a saving throw
at a -2 penalty to shake off the disease.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Cypress Swamp
A pack of 1d4+1 bog beasts has taken up residence beneath an ancient,
black cypress in the heart of the swamp. The fish here are plentiful and the

Bog Creeper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d6), 4 tendrils (1d4) or bite (2d4)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Constrict, spit acid, camouflage
Move: 4/9 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

are getting uppity and preparing to move against the isolated town.
The men are dead, but it wasn’t goblins that got them. In fact, the goblins
that stumbled upon the remains of the men and their scattered belongings
were killed moments after the men by a bog creeper that makes its home
among the hundreds of stumps in the cleared forest. The bog creeper
grabbed the men and goblins and moved on once it had digested its meal.
It now hides among the stumps, its tendrils spread out along the ground,
waiting for more victims to stumble into its clutches.
Inside the creature's gullet are 60 gp, three small rubies (50 gp each)
and a +1 silver dagger.

The bog creeper is a creature native to the thickest, darkest swamps. It
superficially resembles a man-sized rotted tree trunk sprouting several thorny
tendrils each about 10 feet long and a single 6-foot long limb. Bog creepers
are carnivorous, lurking amid dead trees and stumps waiting to ambush
unsuspecting prey. When prey comes within range, a bog creeper lashes out
with its single limb and slashes with its tendrils. If two tendrils hit the same
opponent, the creature grabs the victim and constricts it for 2d4 damage as it
transfers the prey to its mouth. Three times per day, a bog creeper can vomit
digestive sap on opponents (2d8 points of damage; save for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Stumped
Two loggers from Carson's Mill are missing. The men were last seen heading
into the hills above the logging camp, making their way toward the deep woods.
Their axes were found scattered amid the stumps of the cleared forest, along
with a couple of goblin spears. The villagers fear the men have been abducted
– or killed – by the ugly little humanoids. Worse still, two of the men searching
for the missing loggers are now missing, and the villagers fear that the goblins

Bog Mummy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Slam (1d6 + bog rot)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Bog rot, +1 or better weapon to hit, resistance to
fire (50%)
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

Bog mummies resemble normal mummies, but are covered with a thin
layer of swamp mud. Bog mummies rarely leave the swamp where they
were formed. They hate life and attack any living creature that trespasses
in their swamp. Bog mummies can only be harmed by magic weapons. Its
touch infects victims who fail a saving throw with bog rot, a supernatural
disease that does not allow wounds to heal naturally, and cuts magical
healing in half until cured with the cure disease spell. Humanoids killed
by a bog mummy rise as bog mummies themselves in 1d4 days unless
their bodies are removed from the swamp or a cure disease spell is cast
on the corpse. A bog mummy's movement is unaffected by mud, marshes
and swamps.

Hanging Was Too Good for Him
On a peaty moor frequented only by ravens, scrawny ebon hares and the
timid priests of the god of the scythe, one might have the misfortune to
come across a low pool of water that is now home to a bog mummy. The
mummy was a common thief that was strangled and thrown into the holy
waters that are marked with a runic pillar.
The bog mummy has leathery, slate colored skin, dead eyes and stark
white hair. It still wears the rope that hanged it, and has thin, atrophied
arms and legs that, despite their appearance, are horribly strong. When it
opens its mouth to groan, a thick, distended tongue lolls out. A terrible
visage to be sure.
Bronze rings, bracelets, anklets and torques have been cast into the
waters of the pond, and 1d10 x 100 gp worth of these goods can be found
with an hour of uncomfortable searching. Such robberies will not go
unnoticed by the god of the scythe.

Credit: The Bog Mummy originally appeared in the Second Edition Return to
White Plume Mountain (© Wizards of the Coast, 1999) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Bruce
Cordell.

Bogeyman
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [12]
Attacks: claw (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Frighten, create illusions, magical weapons to hit
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A bogeyman is a man-sized undead that lacks a corporeal body. A bogeyman can
create realistic illusions and sounds to scare victims, and can only be hit by
magical weapons. An opponent seeing a bogeyman must make a saving throw or run
in fear (as per the spell).

Bump in the Night

This encounter takes place in a long hall (either a dungeon or inn or
a similar setting) with many doors evenly spaced on either side. Some or all
of the doors could be illusions. A bogeyman haunts this area.

It uses its fear ability to scatter the party before running into one of the
doors. Using illusions and its incorporeal form, it runs in and out of various
doors.  PCs chasing it will find an empty room­– even as the creature exits
from a different door across the hall.  Once the bogeyman has a victim alone,
it attacks.

The bogeyman is something of a coward and flees if cornered or outnumbered.
One of the rooms has a shallow grave (possibly under floorboards) barely
noticeable to casual observers. The grave is old and contains the remnants of
the bogeyman (once a thief). His body still holds a short sword with a hollow
pommel. Within the pommel are 4 rubies (50 gp each) and a treasure map (the
reason he was slain).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Boggart
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  Electrical discharge (2d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Immune to magic, magical abilities
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Although a boggart's natural form is that of a small will-o’-wisp,
boggarts usually take the form of a 2-foot tall humanoid with unkempt
dark hair, an untrimmed shaggy beard, thick mustache, pale skin and
green eyes. The boggart is a relative of the will-o-wisp. Sages believe it
to be a sort of “larval” or immature form of said creature. Boggarts are
immune to most spells or spell-like abilities that allow spell resistance,
except magic missile, protection from evil, protection from evil 10-ft
radius and maze. Boggarts can use ESP (as the spell) at will and can
become invisible for 10 minutes each day. Once per day, a boggart can
unleash a screech that causes confusion (per the spell) in all those within
30 feet who fail a saving throw. The confusion lasts for 6 rounds. Each
additional boggart within 10 feet that joins the screeching imposes a -1
penalty to the saving throw. Boggarts not only deliver electrical shocks
with their physical attacks, but also throw electrical current up to 10 feet,
dealing 2d6 points of damage (save for half).

Acts of War
A pack of 1d4+1 boggarts haunts a lonely bridge on a rapid river that
meanders through the lands between two baronies. The sole means of
communication between these baronies, it was until recently stalked by
a notorious highwayman. The boggarts electricuted the bandit (his life
was a series of disasters that culminated in his fey encounter) and strung
his body up in the branches of a gallows oak on the near side of the river.
The pitiless creatures entertain themselves by tossing the body down
in front of travelers and making it dance. Folk who attempt to flee with
their wagons are attacked on the bridge and tossed, alive or dead, into the
rapids. More than a few unfortunates have washed up downshore, and
one ambitious counsellor has asserted that their deaths are a clear act of
war by the neighboring barony.

Credit: The Boggart originally appeared in the First Edition module WG4 The
Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in
the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is
used by permission. This is not the same Boggart that appeared in Dragon #54
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Bone Cobbler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  2 hammers (1d4) or 2 claws (1d3)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Animate bones, breath weapon
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

The bone cobbler is a tattered and desiccated humanoid often mistaken
for a zombie in weak light. The bone cobbler is a malign and evil creature
that delights in slaying its opponents and stripping the flesh from their
bones. Bone cobblers take the skeletal remains of those they kill and
combine them with other bones in their lair. From these bones they sculpt
and form weird humanoid or half-humanoid skeletal statues. Once per
day, a bone cobbler can animate up to 5 skeletal statues within 30 feet.

These creatures fight as skeletons, though their forms and structures do
not necessarily resemble anything remotely humanoid. A bone cobbler
can rapidly strip all the flesh from a human-sized creature in 3 rounds
using its claws and hammers. Once stripped, the bone cobbler devours the
flesh and collects the victim's bones to use in its “sculptures”. A creature
slain in this manner can only be brought back to life by a wish spell.
Finally, a bone cobbler can bellow forth a cloud of vapors every 1d4+1
rounds that covers a 10-foot-radius area. Creatures within the area must
succeed on a saving throw or be slowed (as the slow spell) for 1d4 rounds.

Everybody Needs a Hobby
The sculptor of idols was never as reverent as his customers. His last
object d’art was an idol of the love goddess for a shrine located out in the
sticks. His progress on this particular sculpture had been hampered by
the presence of his model, a peasant girl of very pleasing face and figure.
Alas, a fortnight ago the maiden's paramour got wind of her new position
and, with two boon companions struck, bashing the sculptor's head in and
making a terrible mess of his workshop.

By the next night, one of the murderers had disappeared, his hovel
turned into a bloody mess. The others followed, but the disappearances
did not end with the trio of killers. In all, twenty villagers have gone
missing. After the first five disappeared, the stripped bones of the others
began to crop up, often jumbled and put together into bizarre shapes. The
elders have sent for a priest from the imperial market town further down
the river, but no help has yet arrived.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Boneneedle
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d3 + marrow poisoning)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Marrow poisoning, aversion to daylight
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Boneneedles are bloated, yellowishwhite blobs of rubbery flesh with spidery
legs of black or gold. Two long, sharply-curved mandibles protrude from the
monster. The mandibles are glossy-black and hollow, and aid the boneneedle in
piercing its prey's flesh and bone and siphoning off its meal. After feeding,
its form takes on a sickly yellow color.

The boneneedle's bite secretes a thick, syrupy neurotoxin that breaks down
bone (save resists).  A creature with weakened bones suffers an extra +2
damage each time he is struck.

Marrow Donor
Bones crunch underfoot in this narrow underground passage. A massive
gray wolf lies collapsed amid the white heaps. It whimpers weakly but
doesn’t move. It has a red leather collar around its neck. Written on the
collar is the word Jasper. Leg bones, spinal columns and arm bones
surround the animal, each bone splintered and picked clean of flesh.
The bones are mainly from animals, but a few humanoid remains
can be found.

The wolf is the animal companion of Hollister, a ranger who
entered the cave and died there. The wolf waited outside the
cave for three days before venturing inside. He was attacked
by the bone needles that live in the underground cavern
among the bones. The animal is barely alive and in need
of care.
A nest of 1d6+5 bone needles lives in the rocky passage.
The bone needles burrow out of the broken bones to attack
living creatures. One is wrapped around the underside of
the wolf's throat. If rescued, the wolf follows PCs who
rescued it.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Bonesnapper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d8) and tail slap (1d3)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Surprise on a roll of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

appendage, which it so happened was equipped with a ring of invisibility,
a ring which has, stewing in the beast's digestive juices, made it vanish
from sight. The other members of the menagerie are particularly excited,
having not been fed for several days.

The bonesnapper resembles a man-sized bipedal dinosaur with graygreen flesh
mottled with gray spots. Its eyes are scarlet and its teeth are yellow. Though
unintelligent, it is fond of collecting and decorating its lair with the
jawbones of its victims.

Copyright Notice: Credit: The Bonesnapper originally appeared in the First
Edition Fiend Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by
permission.  Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian
Livingstone.

Don’t Feed the Animals
You wander into a vast cavern containing a number
of cages composed of steel bars set in a circle 10-ft in
diameter, the bars rising from floor to ceiling - the
height ranges from 15 to 25 feet. There are fifteen
cages in all, each containing a monster (you can
choose them at random from this volume, if you
like) save for one. One cage is empty, its only
contents being a silvery skullcap and small patch
of dried blood. The blood actually forms a trail
from the cage to an exit some 30 yards away. It
doesn’t take a ranger to tell that some pour soul
dragged itself from the cage to the door.
While the cage has no visible occupant, it does
have an invisible occupant - a bonesnapper. The
wizard who built this subterranean menagerie, made
the mistake of quickly grasping through the bars for his hat
and getting it stuck. The bonesnapper made quick work of the invading

Bonesucker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  4 tentacles (1d4+4 + liquefy bones)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Liquefy bones, +1 or better weapon to hit
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

This bizarre creature resembles a fleshy tree trunk. Atop its main body
protrudes a mass of writhing tentacles that constantly ooze and drip a
brownish-yellow fluid. These tentacles appear to be only one or two feet
long, but can be extended up to 10 feet. Near the top of its body is a
ring of black, unblinking eyes that make it impossible for the monster
to be surprised. Bonesuckers stand about 10 feet tall and move about
through the use of 5 thick tentacles at their base. They stalk the darkness
of wastelands and dank caves. Bonesuckers consume only the bones of
an opponent by grabbing it and piercing its flesh with its hollow tentacles.
Victims of a successful tentacle attack must pass a saving throw or be held
fast and pierced by the hollow, bony protrusions that line the tentacle.
These tubes inject digestive enzymes into the bones, inflicting 2d4 points
of damage and causing 1d2 points of strength damage each round.

sculpted by a mad genius, suggesting humanoid and animal shapes that
came out of a madman's nightmares.
In the center of the room there is a partial magic circle surrounded
by a number of puddles of wax that used to be candles. A half-finished
sculpture of what appears to be a twisted, evil tree stands next to the
circle. On the margins of the circle lies the remains of a human body - just
dried skin from which the bones and tissue have been removed.
The skin is swathed in robes of black velvet that were held on by a
corded belt. A blank scroll, partially burned, lies next to the body. The
body belongs to a wizard and artist whose model escaped from the magic
circle. The model was a bonesucker, a bizarre entity brought from another
dimension by means of the now useless scroll. The bonesucker is still
lurking in the chamber, waiting for a new victim.

Fatal Error
The tunnel you are traveling down ends in an iron grate with a latch
mechanism at the top. The grate is thick and studded with small spikes.
Unhooking the latch causes the spring loaded grate to slam down on
anyone standing in front of it, causing 2d6 points of damage to those who
fail leap back (i.e. fail a saving throw).
Beyond the iron grate there is a large chamber, easily 100 feet wide
and 200 feet long with a 30-foot high ceiling. The chamber is filled with
bizarre, disturbing statues - most of them carved from basalt , but a few
carved from greenish marble or limestone. The statues look to have been

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Bookworm
The bookworm is a tiny, 1-inch long, gray, seemingly normal worm. This
miniscule creature is the bane of scholars, wizards, and sages, for its primary
source of food is the paper, wood, and leather that make up books.
Bookworms cannot harm living creatures, but they burrow through wood,
leather, rope, and paper very quickly. They ignore the hardness of such
materials, and a burrowing bookworm deals 3 points of damage per round to
dead wood, rope, paper, or leather. Bookworms are quick and agile (move 9)
and seek to avoid being seen. To this end, they can alter their body color to
match that of their surroundings. They surprise on a roll of 1-4 on 1d6.
Scrolls are destroyed in a single round and any spells contained on it are
destroyed as well. A spellbook loses one spell level per round that a bookworm
spends burrowing into it. For example, a spellbook has 100 pages and can hold
a maximum of 100 total spell levels (a spell takes up one page per spell level).
Multiple bookworms can destroy a spellbook much faster. Each bookworm
burrowing through a book destroys one spell level per round.
A typical lair (or brood) contains 1d4 x 10 bookworms. They are easily killed
by attacks that deal damage over an area (such as fire or cold). Consider one
worm killed for each point of damage dealt.

through the trash uncomfortable. The air in the cavern is very close and
muggy. About a dozen holes in the ceiling spew more trash into the room
(from an indeterminate source) as people walk through it. Those walking
through the cavern are wading through both bookworms and rot grubs. Each
round spent in the room brings a 1 in 6 chance of attack by one or the other.

Credit: The Bookworm originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Taking Out the Trash
You enter a cavern 60 feet long and between 15 feet and 20 feet wide.
The cavern is piled up to waist height with trash and detritus, mostly in the
form of worm-ridden books and tomes. The trash gives off a four odor (per
the troglodyte stench ability) and a good amount of heat, making walking

Brass Man
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 slam or 1 weapon (3d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Spit molten brass (6d6), +1 or better magic weapon
to hit, slowed by lightning, healed by fire, immune to spells
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

A brass man is an 8-foot tall humanoid composed of brass and weighing
about 900 pounds. Its facial features are exquisitely and delicately
worked. Some brass men have ancient runes and symbols carved into
their bodies. Many are constructed with weapons, though the average
brass golem relies on its fists. In combat, a brass man can spit a 30-foot
stream of molten brass every 1d4 rounds (6d6 damage). Lightning slows
a brass man, and fire heals it. They are immune to all other spells.

Head Games
An abandoned shrine sits deep in the Kriegh Forest, its flaking stucco
columns entwined with clinging ivy. The stone portico rises above a
marble entryway. Ornate double doors bordered in brass are closed but
not locked.

The interior walls of the 20-foot-by-20-foot shrine are lined with 10
1-foot-deep niches that run the length of each side of the structure. These
shelves start at floor level and rise to the ceiling 15 feet overhead. Each
20-foot-long niche houses a row of carved stone heads, about 20 in a
row (around 200 stone heads per wall). Some are representations of
influential leaders, while others are gods and goddesses. Nestled among
the heads are bird nests and other debris carried in by forest creatures. A
shattered skylight lets rain in, creating standing pools of stagnant water
where mosquitos buzz in swirling clouds. A rope hangs down through the
skylight to coil on the floor. Engravings on the walls of prancing satyrs
and reveling druids are covered with green mold.

The heads are enchanted so that they all turn in unison to “watch”
people who enter the shrine. The heads always turn to follow the person
closest to them as they walk about the chamber. The effect is like being
on a stage in the middle of a gallery of spectators. The heads are harmless,
but disconcerting.

Against the wall opposite the brass entry sits a basalt altar, its sides
decorated with idyllic pastoral scenes. A three-inch-thick glass top on the
altar shields a depression in the stone that contains a shining gold ring
carved with images of ivy and a scroll sealed with a wax signet. The
burned body of a tomb robber lies in a heap of charred remains at the base
of the altar. His armor is decayed and melted through, with obvious burn
spots marring the leather. A crowbar in one of his skeletal hands is bent
and twisted, the metal running like wax on the floor tiles. One corner of
the glass atop the altar is scratched and chipped.

One of the heads behind the altar actually belongs to a brass man
kneeling inside a space covered by a phantasmal force. The golem's
entire body – except its head – is hidden by the spell so that it appears to
be just one of the many moving heads lining the shelves. The brass man's
features are coated with a thin patina of plaster to blend in with the stone
heads beside it. It rotates to watch PCs, just like the rest of the heads in
the gallery. The golem is tasked with protecting the altar and its contents.
The brass man kneels in its niche and doesn’t bother PCs unless they
touch the altar or harm the other carvings. If that happens, it spits a stream
of molten brass at the closest PC then rises out of the phantasmal stone
wall to attack. When it does so, a wall of fire ignites across the doorway,
blocking the room's only entrance. The golem returns to its post after PCs
are driven off.

The ring is a ring of regeneration, while the scroll contains three druid
spells of the Game Referee's choosing.  (See the angel, empyreal entry for
another encounter with the brass man.)

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Casey Christofferson.

Brownie
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d3
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Tiny sword (1d3)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Magic resistance (25%), spells
Move: 9
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

A brownie is a timid, quiet fey creature that prefers to live only among
its own kind. Most brownies dwell in pastoral areas untouched by
civilization, such as deep forests and wild lands far from other creatures.
They resemble 18-inch tall elves with greenish skin and brown, gray or
tawny hair. Most brownies prefer green or otherwise brightly colored
clothing. They may be distant relatives of pixies and halflings, but this
has never been proven. In woodland areas, brownies surprise on a roll of
1-4 on 1d6, and is only surprised on a roll of 1 on 1d8. The can use the
following spells once per day each: Confusion, continual light, dimension
door, protection from evil 10-ft radius and mirror image.

Delectable Desserts
A band of 1d8+4 brownies lives together in a mossy cottage constructed
next to an ancient oak. The brownies cultivate a small garden in and
around the cottage, though it is so chaotic and overgrown one might never
recognize it as such. The cottage has a two-level cellar, the upper level
being used to store preserves and roots and the lower level for cultivating
large, musty smelling mushrooms that are dried and turned into a delicious
broth or powdered and turned into a cure for many diseases (+2 bonus to
save vs. disease if applied to a wound).
The lower level has a secret door hidden behind shelves of mushrooms
(the shelves swing out of the way if a secret lever is tripped). Behind
the secret door there is a long tunnel winds its way beneath the woods,
sometimes broken by a spiral stairway into a hollowed oak and finally
ending in a hollowed hillock of greenish, marble boulders. In this hidden
space there are a number of tree roots hanging from the ceiling and woven
together into a single strand that drips moisture into a copper recepticle
set in the floor.
A single draught from the copper basin acts as a cure light wounds spell.
Two draughts acts as a cure light wounds and cure disease spell and three
draughts acts simply as a very slow acting polymorph, turning a person
into a wolfberry bush over the course of six hours. Not surprisingly,
there are a number of well tended wolfberry bushes around the brownies’
cottage, the fruit being used to make jelly tarts that act as half strength
cure light wounds spells but take 2 rounds to consume.

Credit: The Brownie originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Brume
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Magical weapons to hit, magical abilities
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A brume is an opaque spirit that takes human form. It can only be
hit by magical weapons. A brume's claws cause an opponent to forget
everything that has happened in the last 1d6 hours (save resists). A brume
can create a billowing fog to appear three times a day.

Swept Away in the Moment
A maze made of narrow 5-foot-wide bridges stretches throughout a
cavernous room. The bridge-path has many twists and turns that often end in
dead ends. The floor of the room lies 60 feet down on each side of the bridge
and appears to be covered in upward pointing sword blades. Oozing carefree
through the blades are 3 black puddings. They make no attempt to climb the
walls, contently dissolving refuse scattered along the bladed floor.
With careful study, a clear and safe path to the other side of the room
can be navigated. The exact dimension of the bridge maze is left to the
Game Referee, but the arching bridges should be expansive with many
dead ends to force PCs to backtrack.
A brume hides beneath a bridge two-thirds of the way across the room.
It creates a fog to cover the area while it attacks with its memory-robbing

claws. PCs robbed of their memory find themselves lost on a bridge maze
without a clue as to where they are or why they are there.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Brykolakas
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6 + infection)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Create spawn, death throes, infection, change
shape
Move: 6/24 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Brykolakas are 6-foot-tall humanoid creatures with bluish-gray skin
and unkempt black or gray hair. They can assume the shape of a dolphin
or a manta ray at will. Their eyes burn with a hatred for living creatures,
and their hands end in razor-sharp talons with black or broken nails.
Brykolakas dress in flowing robes or gowns. When killed, a brykolakas’
body changes into a pool of deadly poison (2d4 points of damage to all
within 10 feet). The creature's claws also carry a deadly infection that
deteriorates a victim's organs (save or die). Any humanoid slain by a
byrkolakas rises as a kalanos in 1d4 days under the creature's control:

Kalanos: HD 3; AC 8[11]; Attack 1 slam (1d4 + 1 level drain);
Save 14; Alignment Chaos; Move 6, Swim 24; CL/XP 4/120;
Special: Level drain (1)

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Haunted Potty
Just offshore from the coastal town of Niborlyn dwells a brykolakas.
The brykolakas lairs in an old place of worship dedicated to a sea
goddess. The mostly intact ruins of a cathedral lie submerged in the
bay, only the square top of the 60-foot-tall bell tower visible above the
surface during low tide. Four stone sculptures of gargoyles (inanimate)
stand watch on the corners of the tower. Although the stone church and bell
tower remain, the tower's wooden access door rotted away long ago, leaving
a square portal into the cathedral's black interior.  The villagers call the
tower “Hell's Well,” not knowing of the submerged cathedral below.  The
fishermen stay clear of the top of the bell tower and believe it an ill omen
to even view the gargoyles. The brykolakas occasionally raids the village of
livestock or lone drunkards.  The brykolakas has discovered that the village's
sewer network empties into an undersea cave. Through this cave, the brykolakas
can enter the village undetected by climbing the walls of the pit toilets.

Buckawn
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Dagger (1d3) or dart (1d3)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Poison use, spells, magic resistance (10%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Buckawns look like halfling-sized humanoids with swarthy skin, dark
hair, greenish-brown eyes and brown clothes. Buckawns are somehow
related to brownies, but they are nowhere near as kind-hearted and playful.
Buckawns are extremely reclusive and rarely have dealings with outside
races. Trade of any kind between a buckawn tribe and another race is
virtually unheard of. Characters who journey into a buckawn's realm are
usually left alone, providing they themselves leave the buckawn's realm
alone. Buckawns readily use poisoned blades when confronted with a
tough opponent, when outnumbered, or when battling opponents for
whom they have great disdain. They favor moonseed berries as poison
and usually have a plentiful supply readily available (see the sidebar).

Buckawns can use the following spells at will: Phantasmal force,
invisibility and insect plague (1/day).

Moonseed Berries
These small berries are bluish-purple and resemble wild
grapes. They are highly poisonous and are often mixed with
food or crushed and smeared on a weapon or object. The poison
is deadly unless the victim succeeds at a saving throw. Even if
the saving throw is successful, the poison inflicts 1d8 points of
damage. A vial of the poison can be purchased from unsavory
types for 1,500 gp.

Children of the Berries
A band of 1d6+5 buckawn poachers has constructed a hunting blind
on the outskirts of a bustling village. The buckawns prey on children
who wander too far from home, bringing them back to their own hidden
village in the dark forest to work as slaves. The children are put to the task
of picking moonseed berries. The berries are quite acidic, raising boils on
their fingers and staining them a deep crimson.
The slave children are kept in mildly comfortable cages in a tall, barn
like structure disguised to look like a copse of trees. The buckawn village
has a population of 1d10+10 living in teepee-like structures constructed
from peeled tree bark. Most of the tribespeople work as quail hunters and
bowyers. The buckawn are currently holding 15 children in their barn.

Credit: The Buckawn originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.


Bumblebee, Giant Worker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: Sting (1d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 6/18 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Giant bees live in enormous hives in massive tress, along cliffs or even
tunneled through soil. A hive can hold as many as 100 bees and always
contains one queen. The poison of a bee does 2d6 points of damage if a
saving throw is failed, 1d4 points of damage if the saving throw succeeds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Bumblebee, Giant Queen
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: Sting (1d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: None
Move: 6/18 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

The queen of a giant bee hive is larger and tougher, than the average
giant bee. The poison of a bee does 2d6 points of damage if a saving
throw is failed, 1d4 points of damage if the saving throw succeeds.

Mis-spelled Bee
The residents of the destitute and dwindling hamlet of Lessef scrape by
farming on their barren lands. The people live with the very real fear of
famine lingering above their heads. Only the locale tavern and church
show any hint of prosperity.

Which is why the villagers were surprised to find a field on the outskirts
overflowing with incredibly large clovers and sunflowers, some reaching
heights of 15 to 20 feet. Recently, a good-hearted but inept druid named
Hagglethorn Beefalo attempted to aid the impoverished citizens. By
casting plant growth and administering a nutrient-rich potion in mass
quantity, he secretly fed the clover and sunflower fields at night. His
plan seemed flawless. The bountiful result would feed the remaining
livestock and allow the town to sell the surplus of the plentiful crops. A
humble man, Hagglethorn didn’t hang around to take credit, desiring that
the townsfolk credit the fertility goddess Freya for their good fortune.
As fate would have it, though, the combination of spells and fertilizer
had unfortunate results: The bees that collected the pollen and nectar also
grew to gigantic sizes.

The territorial bees have now taken the village hostage. The citizens
barricaded themselves into their homes a week ago, and their stored
provisions are all but depleted. A few corpses of slain villagers lie around
the village's well, some still grasping pitchforks and axes where they
made a last stand. Their bodies are swollen and peppered with puncture
wounds. Villagers plead for assistance, but do not open their doors or
windows. The bees have taken over a large barn on the north side of town.
A massive hive fills the interior of the barn. Only the destruction of the
hive and the queen will keep the bees from returning. The nest contains
20-30 giant bees and one queen. The Game Referee should adjust the
number of bees to challenge the players. While the people of Lessef are
grateful, they can offer only small rewards to their saviors. They offer a
jar of pickled eggs, a fox pelt (5 gp) and as much honey as the PCs can
carry.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Bunyip
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Frenzy, roar, vorpal bite
Move: 21 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality (with lawful tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Bunyips are aquatic creature with the front half of a black seal and
the rear half of a grayish-black shark. The bunyip is about 6 feet long,
though specimens of up to 10 feet long have been encountered. Bunyips
do not attack creatures larger than themselves, except in self-defense
or if they detect blood in the water. A bunyip that detects blood in the
water goes into a killing frenzy, as do all other bunyips within a 90-foot
radius. Frenzied bunyips attack twice per round until either they or their
opponents are dead. A frenzied bunyip's swim speed increases to 24.
This frenzy lasts for 10 rounds. When a bunyip roars, all creatures with
4 or less HD within a 100-foot spread must succeed on a saving throw or
become panicked for 2d4 rounds, dropping their weapons and fleeing at
top speed. If a bunyip scores a natural 20 on its attack roll, it severs one
of the opponent's extremities (roll 1d6: 1-3 arm, 4-6 leg; 50% chance of
either right or left).

Feeding Time
To label the lord of the coast a bastard would be accurate on two
counts, namely parentage and personality. The veteran of many battles
and intrigues maintains a stout tower on the limestone cliffs, as well as a
narrow, rickety stair to the strand of beach below and a fairly large curtain
wall encompassing his fields and meadows.

On the beach below his stronghold, the lord of the coast has a long,
stone quay built into the crystal clear waters of the bay. A scaffolding has
been constructed at the end of the quay, with a hook and winch device
that allows a bound subject to be raised and lowered above the water.
Swimming about the quay are is a large bunyip, well trained to circle
the scaffolding when his “feeding gong” is struck at the top of the tower.
The lord keeps a fine collection of skulls on his scaffolding, and a few
incomplete skeletons chained to the battlements of his tower.

Credit: The Bunyip originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Dermot
Jackson.

Burning Dervish
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d6 + 1d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Flame form, spell abilities, resist fire
Move: 9/6 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Burning dervishes vary in appearance, but all resemble humans. Skin
color, eye color, and hair color range across the same spectrum as that for
normal humans. It is said that the burning dervishes were once a noble
tribe of jann who sold their souls to the Sultan of Efreet in exchange for
greater power over the Elemental Plane of Fire. Burning dervishes can
shift into a flame form that resembles a column of fire to deal fire damage
with each slam or weapon attack. Each day, a burning dervishes can
become invisible 3 times, cast pyrotechnics 3 times, cast enlarge twice
and cast produce flame twice. They can also transport themselves and up
to eight creatures to any elemental plane, the Astral Plane or the Material
Plane.

The Desert Toll
A burning sandstorm roars off the desert sands of the Veil, the leading
edge of the blowing grit sparking a bluish flame that dances through the
superheated air. Temperatures soar above 120 degrees, and the driving
sand scours bare skin raw.
A shirtless man with tattoos inked in henna across his bare torso walks
at the head of the storm, his arms wide in greeting even as he ignores the
torrential winds whipping around him. A nimbus of blue flame hugs his
body, but he pays it no mind, brushing the fire away as anyone else would
an annoying gnat.
“Greetings, friends,” he calls, his voice rising above the harsh winds.
“I am Khalid al-Sin. Welcome to the grand desert! Do you have the gold
needed to pass through my glorious desert?” Khalid steeples his hands
before him and smiles.
Khalid is a burning dervish who delights in robbing travelers
crossing “his” desert. He is an accomplished fighter and gladly
takes his toll by beating travelers senseless, then taking their
gold – and any other belongings he desires
– while they are down.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Casey Christofferson.

Cadaver
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4 + disease) and bite (1d6 + disease)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Disease, reanimation
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Cadavers are humanoids dressed in tattered rags. Rotted flesh reveals corded
muscles and sinew stretched tightly over its skeleton. Hollow eye sockets
flicker with an unholy fire of orange or yellow light. The cadaver's mouth is
lined with jagged and broken teeth, and its hands end in wicked claws. The
creature's claws and bite transmit horrible diseases that waste victims’ flesh
(1d4 hp damage; save resists). When killed, a cadaver regenerates 1 hit point
per round. It stands up ready to fight again when it regains its full hp.
Damage caused by spells is not restored.

Bring Out Your Dead
A cloaked figure stands in the center of Arnelt, his wrinkled hand resting on
a small cart pulled by a broken-down mare. Corpses lie heaped in the cart,
stacked like cords of wood. The old man is as broken as his horse, but stands
patiently by as two men load another body. A crying woman hands him a bag of
coins and he nods silently. When the body is loaded, he takes the horse's
reins and tugs it forward. His voice is loud as he calls out, “Bring out your
dead!”

The old man never stays long in any town. He arrives at sunrise and leaves
before the sun goes down. Rowling is a man with many secrets.  First off, he's
not actually an undertaker. And second, he's not and old man; he's actually
a young thief named Rowling who concocted this scheme to make money. He's been
traveling from town to town for a month now collecting the dead. He has no
intention of burying the dead he collects, however. Instead, he takes the
corpses outside town and dumps them in secluded spots where they won’t be
found.

His callousness has caused many of the unburied corpses left in his wake to
rise as cadavers focused on finding the false undertaker. The undead charge
into towns Rowling has visited, hoping to finally catch the liar before he
moves on. They are mindless, but driven as a group to complete this single
purpose. They spare no one in the towns they pass through as they follow the
man who dumped their bodies.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Cadaver Lord
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4 + disease) and bite (1d6 + disease)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Disease, reanimation, create spawn, command undead, magical abilities, spell resistance (20%), +1 magic weapons to hit
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Cadavers lords are humanoids wearing tattered rags. Rotted flesh reveals
corded muscles and sinew stretched tightly over its skeleton. Hollow eye
sockets flicker with an unholy fire of orange or yellow light. The cadaver
lord's mouth is lined with jagged and broken teeth, and its hands end in
wicked claws. The creature's claws and bite transmit horrible diseases that
waste victims’ flesh (1d4 hp damage; save resists). When killed, a cadaver
lord regenerates 1 hit point per round. It stands up ready to fight again when
it regains its full hp. Damage caused by spells is not restored. A creature
slain by a cadaver lord awakens in 1d4 rounds as a cadaver. The cadaver lord
can command any undead to do its bidding.

Once per day, a cadaver lord can cast darkness (15-foot radius) and fear.

The Wall of Thorns
A wall of darkness fills the corridor ahead. Just inside the perfect line of
darkness is a spiked wall that fills the 10-foot-wide dungeon corridor.  Ivory
horns and metal spikes jut out at random angles across the boards forming the
wall. Bodies of adventurers are spitted on the horns. Severed heads are
mounted on spikes atop the 8-foot-tall wall. The wall leaves a three-foot gap
between its top and the ceiling. The wall is mounted on steel wheels and can
be pushed forward quite quickly. Anyone struck by the wall takes 3d6 points of
damage and must save or become impaled on the racks of horns and spikes.

Chained to the back of the wall are two muscular minotaurs. The creatures’
sole purpose is to push the wall forward against anyone approaching the
darkness. The minotaurs wear blindfolds and are covered in thick scars. A line
of six ghouls stand behind the minotaurs, whipping them mercilessly with
cat-o-nine-tails.

A cadaver lord named Iniquitus Shaw sits on a bone throne pulled by another
crouching minotaur. Shaw's eyes smolder a hellish flame as he watches his
minions drive creature's before his wall of death. Rarely does he rise from
the throne to attack, preferring to let his minions do the dirty work.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Carbuncle
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Bite (1d2)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Discord, foresight, telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Deep in the tangled underbrush of forests and in the remote regions of
dismal swamps and bogs lives a strange creature called the carbuncle.
The carbuncle resembles a cross between an anteater and armadillo with
a large, red jewel embedded in its head. The carbuncle is a withdrawn
creature and seeks to avoid encounters. Should it seek interaction, a
carbuncle often begins by proudly announcing the value of the gem in
its forehead just to watch the reaction such information arouses. Despite
its overall shy nature, the carbuncle has a mischievous side as well, often
seeking to join travelers in order to play pranks and gauge the reactions
of the unfortunate victims of its curiosity. After joining with a party, a
carbuncle will seek to cause discord by using selective telepathic images
and prophesies to breed hostility and suspicion between party members.
These images can be created once per round in the mind of a single
creature within 30 feet of the carbuncle. Affected creatures must pass a
saving throw or fall into loud bickering and arguing with those around
them. If the affected creatures have different alignments, there is a 50%
chance that they attack each other. Carbuncles might also telepathically
contact nearby monsters and lead them to attack the party so that it
can watch in fascination and read the thoughts of the party as they are
attacked, slipping away at an opportune moment. A carbuncle can be
coerced to surrender the gem in its forehead with some difficulty and
much deception. When a carbuncle is slain, its forehead gem crumbles
to dust. If the carbuncle relinquishes its gem, it grows another one within
one month. Carbuncles enjoy watching others fight, but avoids engaging
in combat itself.

Helpful Suggestions
You come across an abandoned caravan wagon. The wagon has been
tipped over and several barrels of pale ale lie in a pile next to it. Sitting
atop the pile, taking a long draught from one of the barrels, is a bizarre
creature that looks like an armadillo with a long snout, low-slung ears and
a large red jewel in its forehead. As the party looks upon the creature, they
hear a voice in their heads, speaking their native language, asking them
what they’re waiting for and to come on over for a drink.

The creature is quite jovial, telling jokes and chattering on about the
dangers of its forest home. It will explain that the caravan was struck by
bandits who chased the merchants into the woods. It suggests moving on
as soon as possible, and will offer to lead the party through the woods.
The carbuncle will take a winding, confusing path in an attempt to
disorient the party, eventually leading them to an ancient tower in the
woods. The tower is built of limestone caked with soil and heavily
weathered and stands 100-ft in height.

The tower can be entered through a portcullis of rusty steel. Beyond
the portcullis is a small, empty circular room. The carbuncle hangs back,
explaining that it suffers from claustrophobia and explaining that the
trapdoor in the ceiling leads to a magical chamber that holds an ancient
relic (choose something important to your home campaign). When the
party pulls on the rope tied to the trapdoor, the tower rapidly descends
into the earth, the voice of the carbuncle in their heads laughing and
wishing them a pleasant journey through the underworld.

When the tower hits bottom, inflicting 1d6 points of damage from the
jarring stop, the exit now leads to a subterranean tunnel and whatever
horrors the referee wishes to inflict on her players.

Credit: The Carbuncle originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Albie
Fiore.

Carrion Moth
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  4 tentacles (paralysis) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Drone, paralysis, stench
Move: 12/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Carrion moths resemble giant moths with long, beautiful wings covered
in rippling patterns resembling skulls. Its head is centipede-like, with four
long tentacles surrounding its mouth, which has a single pair of needlelike mandibles. Just as the caterpillar grows into a moth, sages believe the
carrion crawler eventually sheds its form and transforms into the carrion
moth. The carrion moth grows to a maximum length of 20 feet. Its wings
are lined with tiny holes and veins that allow the carrion moth to emit a
whining drone that affects all creatures that hear it. Affected creatures
must pass a saving throw or be confused (as the spell) for 2d4 rounds.
Creatures hit by the carrion moth's tentacles must pass a saving throw
or be paralyzed for 2d6 rounds. Carrion moths are attracted to the stench
of decaying flesh and the light of anything larger than a torch or lantern.
When a carrion moth dies, its carcass splits open and releases a foulsmelling gas. All living creatures (except other carrion moths) within 5
feet of the carcass must succeed on a saving throw or be nauseated for
1d4+1 rounds.

Crystal Cone Cave
In a large, conical cavern (70 feet in diameter at the bottom, 80 feet
high), 2d6 carrion moths swarm around a glowing crystal at the pinnacle
of the cavern. The crystal is actually a gnomish construction of glass
and filled with a glowing ooze that causes terrible burns and possible
mutations to people who are exposed to it. The ooze can also be used
to enchant weapons, imparting a +1 bonus to weapons dipped into it.
Removing the crystal from the ceiling is not easy, and the carrion moths
make the operation even more difficult. If the glowing ooze touches a
moth, it swells to twice its size (double Hit Dice) and becomes especially
aggressive.

Copyright Notice: Authors Casey Christofferson and Scott Greene.

Caryatid Column
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: Longsword (1d8+1)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Immune to magic, half damage from normal weapons, shatter weapons
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A caryatid column is akin to the stone golem in that it is a magical
construct created by a spellcaster. They look like exquisitely sculpted and
chiseled statues of beautiful female warriors carrying longswords. The
longsword is constructed of steel, but is melded with the column and made
of stone until the column animates. Caryatid columns are programmed as
guardians and activate when certain conditions or stipulations are met or
broken (such as a living creature enters a chamber guarded by a caryatid
column). It does not move more than 50 feet from the area it is guarding
or protecting. They are immune to all spells except transmute rock to
mud, which deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level to the caryatid
column, transmute mud to rock, which heals the caryatid column of all
damage and stone to flesh, which makes it subject to normal damage from
weapons and suspends its immunity to magic for 1 round. Whenever a
weapon strikes the caryatid column, the wielder must pass a saving throw
or the weapon shatters into pieces. Magic weapons add their enchantment
bonus to the saving throw.

Works of Art
You enter an opulent, though quite ancient and dusty, throne room clad
in malachite. The ceiling is held aloft by a number of brass pillars. The
room measures 20 feet in width and 40 feet in length, the ceiling being
15 feet overhead. At the end of the room there is a stately marble throne,
ornately carved into images of cherubs, wood nymphs and panthers,
flanked by two seven-foot-tall pillars of ghostly white marble.
The pillars are carved to represent twin maidens, naked, their waist-long
hair adorned with stars and gleaming, curved longswords held above their
heads, forming an arch. The pillars are caryatid columns and programmed
to behead any who approaches the throne who is not crawling on all fours,
nose pressed against the ground. The are likewise programmed to defend
the rightful ruler of the kingdom.

Credit: The Caryatid Column originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jean
Wells.

Caterprism
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 4 legs (1d8) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Crystal silk, crystalline mandibles
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A caterprism is a caterpillar made of crystal with hexagonal body
segments and twelve sharply angled legs. Each body segment is about 2
feet long and contains a single pair of legs. The head of a caterprism is
caterpillar-like, with large faceted eyes and huge mandibles. Three times
per day, a caterprism can spew forth a crystalline silk up to 20 feet that
instantly solidifies into a rock-like substance. Creatures caught in the silk
are impaled for 3d6 points of damage (save for half) as it hardens. The
crystalline mandibles of a caterprism are extremely sharp. If a caterprism
rolls a natural 20 with its bite attack, it severs the head of its opponent.

The Crystal Cocoon
Gerdstall's Rock and Mineral Exchange is a small shop at the base
of the Hollow Spire Mountains. Three days ago two well-liked former
miners, the Gerdstall brothers, died in the shop they loved. Their bodies
were impaled within a crystalline web of spikes. Sharp web filaments fill
the tiny shack.

Behind the shop, a massive crystal cocoon hangs from a stout elm's
branch. A dark hole beneath the split-open cocoon leads into the mountain,
and several shallower holes are dug throughout the yard. The hole looks
like a dog has been at work, frantically digging into the ground over and
over.

A caterprism recently hatched from the crystalline cocoon (which the
Gerdstalls thought was an elaborately carved chunk of crystal and not a
real pod). The newly hatched caterprism chased the brothers into their
shop, and lashed out when one of the men struck it with a broom. The
creature's web of crystal spikes killed the brothers, and the giant earth
creature bored its way into the mountains. It is now digging a series
of tunnels for a lair, but returns each night to feast on exotic stones the
brothers buried in their back yard to keep them safe.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Caterwaul
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Screech
Move: 21/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Caterwauls are semi-intelligent bipedal felines with dark, blue fur and
long tails. Caterwauls are terribly quick, and they use this speed to run
down their prey. The caterwaul's lair is most often a cave littered with
sticks, twigs, and leaves, with walls covered in scratch marks where the
beast has honed its claws. Once every 10 rounds, a caterwaul can emit a
piercing screech that deals 1d8 points of damage to all creatures within
60 feet that hear it. A creature that makes a successful saving throw takes
half damage. About 1 in 6 caterwauls is so quick that it enjoys a +2 bonus
to AC and can make an additional claw attack each round.

Catnip Tribute
Descending a rugged mountain trail - wide but precarious - you see an
assemblage of thirty men in baggy trousers and long, heavy coats of blueblack velvet and brass buttons. The men in the front rank carry long poles
topped by stylized brass panther heads holding lanterns in their mouths.
Behind this front rank are two ranks of men holding wicked looking
pole arms and wearing shirts of gleaming scales in place of velvet coats.
Behind these soldiers stride eight men holding aloft a palanquin of teak
and silver topped by a gauzy pavilion of red and yellow. The palanquin is
followed by more soldiers, these men armed with long bows and curved
swords.
At the head of the assemblage is a tall man with pink eyes and platinum
hair. He rides a white charger, caparisoned in damask silks, and wears a
coat of black mail and a velvet cape. Naturally, the assemblage expects
travelers coming the opposite way to stand aside, and they will press this
demand with a show of arms if necessary. The leader of the assemblage
proclaims himself the grand vizier of a hidden country in the mountains,
a country of teak forests and spice plantations and beautiful men and
woman with honey-colored skin and hair as black as a starless night.
On the palanquin is the kingdom's living goddess, she of the swift death
who commands fear with her voice, which sounds like the scream of a
thousand innocents.
The living goddess is a caterwaul. She is on her way into the lowlands
to pay homage to the Cat Lord and bring a tribute of catnip in intricately
carved pomanders of teak inlaid with silver images of hunting cats.

Credit: The Caterwaul originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Albie
Fiore.

Cave Cricket
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 kicks (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Chirp
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Cave crickets are larger versions of normal crickets (3 feet long) and,
much like the smaller crickets they resemble, are relatively harmless. The
cave cricket's chirping can be heard to a range of 300 feet. Creatures
within 20 feet of a chirping cave cricket cannot be heard unless they
scream. Spellcasters in the area must succeed on a saving throw to
successfully cast a spell. The chirping increases the chance of wandering
monsters by 30%. Cave cricket usually avoid combat, making a couple
kick attacks against an attacker and then fleeing.

Kicking Cricket Style
You come to a very tricky portion of the underworld - a large cavernous
tunnel of loose, toppled stones, many bearing signs of having been carved
by some unknown subterranean race. At the bottom of this tunnel is a swiftly
moving stream of icy cold water. The stream has cut a 10-foot deep channel
through the tunnel. Narrow paths run alongside the stream, first one bank and
then the other, with crossings either by leaping over a place where the stream
narrows or via narrow, slippery bridges both natural and artificial.
Staring up from the shallower portions of the steam are the skulls of
uncoordinated or unlucky adventurers, along with fragments of stone
faces carved from the gold-colored rock of the tunnel.

The sound of the stream echoes through the tunnel, lulling one to sleep
but for the incessant chirping of a cluster of 1d4+1 cave crickets. The
echoe of the chirping is loud and unnerving, imposing a -1 penalty to all
saving throws, including saving throws to avoid falling into the stream,
which moves at a rate of 120 feet per round.

The tunnel has five such crossings, the banks near the middle crossing being
occupied by the cave crickets in question. Though not terribly dangerous in
and of themselves, a well-placed kick by a cave cricket can mean one's end
if sent over the banks into freezing waters. Each round one is carried down
the stream (which ultimately plunges into deeper portions of the underworld)
inflicts 1d6 points of damage. During each round spent in the waters, one must
pass a saving throw at a cumulative -1 penalty per round of exposure or be
paralyzed by the chilling waters, meaning death by drowning in the next round.

Credit: The Cave Cricket originally appeared in the First Edition module S4
The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in
the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is
used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Cave Fisher
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Filament (see text) and 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Filaments
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

The cave fisher is a 7-foot long insect-like creature with a hard outer shell.
It has eight legs, two of which end in serrated pincers. The cave fisher's
snout fires a strong, web-like adhesive filament it uses to reel in its prey.

The cave fisher lairs on ledges and cliffs underground, where it can quickly
strike and reel in its prey. Its lair is always littered with bones and gear
from its previous victims. Often, the ground and walls nearby are covered
with this filament. The cave fisher's preferred method of attack is to anchor
itself to its ledge and string its filament across the ground of its lair. When a
living creature touches or passes near the filament (1 in 6 chance of spotting
the filament, 2 in 6 for elves), the fisher attempts to trap it and reel it in. If
the cave fisher fails this, it can fire its filament at an opponent up to 60 feet
away. If a cave fisher hits with its filament attack, the filament latches onto
the opponent's body. This deals no damage but drags the stuck opponent
10 feet closer each subsequent round unless that creature breaks free. An
application of liquid with high alcohol content dissolves the adhesive and
forces the cave fisher to release its hold. The filament has 10 hp and
is AC 2 [17]. If the filament is severed, it grows back within 1 hour.

Into the Cave Fisher's Mouth
If the subterranean river gorge inhabited by the cave crickets (q.v.) was not
deadly enough, it becomes worse. The tunnel eventually narrows into a misty
canyon. The stream here punges into the depths of the underworld, creating
a terrible cacaphony that makes it impossible to hear somebody more than 5
feet away and imposes a 5% chance of spell failure on spell casters.

The canyon in question is really more of a vertical than horizontal reality,
as it only extends another 200 feet ahead, but climbs more than 500 feet
upwards, with many caves on precariously hung limestone ledges leading
to other adventures. The canyon also drops 300 feet through a freezing
shower caused by the stream, eventually ending in a cavern of ice.
The upper portions of the canyon are hunted by a gang of 1d4 cave
fishers. The fishers mostly feed on cave crickets and the weird octopoid
rats that lurk in this portion of the underworld.

Credit: The Cave Fisher originally appeared in the First Edition module A4 In
the Dungeons of the Slave Lords (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and
is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Lawrence
Schick.

Leech, Cave
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: 8 tentacles (1d4 blood drain) or bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Blood drain
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Cave leeches measure about 8 feet long and have a flattened semi-translucent body colored a sickly yellow or pale gray. Eight whip-like
tentacles, each about 6 feet long protrude from the cave leech's body
near its head. These tentacles contain rigid hairs that let the cave leech
drain 1d4 hp worth of blood with each strike. Hundreds of smaller
tentacles line its body and aid in locomotion. The cave leech has a large,
round mouth ringed with dozens of razor-like teeth.

The Opportunistic Leeches
A thin trickle of bloody water flows out of a rocky cave in the Malkan
Peaks. The water courses over a jumble of recently fallen rocks that block
much of the spillway. The streambed around the cave entrance is a muddy
mess filled with blood-tinged puddles. Jutting lifelessly out of the rockfall
dam is a hairy arm with a gold signet ring (20 gp) on one finger. Water
seeps around the arm and flows down the rocks.

The ranger Hork Brambletread was looking for a lost bear cub when
he discovered that a recent cave-in had nearly dammed up Flat Rock
Creek. The intrepid outdoorsman clambered up a small waterfall to break
loose the stone dam, but stumbled and fell into a narrow gap between two
boulders. As water poured over him, the sputtering, frantic Hork flailed
wildly, causing another rockfall that slowly suffocated the poor ranger.
His body further blocks the flow of water. A four-foot-deep pool of water
collects within the cave entry.

Feeding on Hork's pale, bloated corpse are three cave leeches. The
cave leeches are aggressive, and fight to get at PCs investigating the dead
ranger.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Cave Moray
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Recoil attack, surprise on 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Cave morays are not related to moray eels, their name coming instead
for a similarity in ferocity and habit between the two creatures. The cave
moray is a slug-like creature, brownish-gray in color, about 5 feet long
and 1 foot thick. Cave morays make their lairs underground in abandoned
mines, dungeons, or natural occurring caves, usually near corridors,
hallways or other areas of high traffic. Its lair is a burrow, just large
enough for its body dug into the walls. Only one cave moray inhabits
each burrow. Cave morays wait in their burrows, usually with a fellow
on the opposite side of the passage, to ambush anyone walking down
their passage. Cave morays enjoy a +1 bonus to hit when they attack a
surprised opponent.

Curiosity Killed the Cat
The prospect of climbing into the circular shaft via the ice cold glass
rungs is daunting. Add to that the brownish, bubbling liquid inside the
rungs, greasy and smelling of cat fur and the blue vapors wafting gently
out of the shaft and causing a tingling in the flesh and it is a bit too much.
And that rheumatic cough that echoes from below. Egad! What could be
down there?
Of course, no sane adventurer would have entered that shaft had they
known it was inhabited by a colony of 1d6+10 cave morays, tucked
neatly into their little burrows and perfectly aware of the weird lifting
qualities of the vapor - that in fact living creatures cannot fall down the
shaft after losing their grip on the rungs - just hanging in space, waiting
for the pitiless beasts to recoil and attack.

Credit: The Cave Moray originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission. Cave morays made their first appearance in d20 in the Necromancer
Games module Tomb of Abysthor by Clark Peterson (©2001, Clark Peterson,
Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Cerberus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20 (120 hp)
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  3 bites (3d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, howl, petrifying gaze, poisonous bite, +1 or better weapon to hit, regenerate 1d6 hp per round, magic resistance (20%)
Move: 24
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 29/6100

The triple-headed Cerberus (there is thankfully only one) is the guardian
of Hades. He appears as a 10-foot long, three-headed black mastiff of
the Molossian breed. Cerberus is tasked with the duty of keeping dead
souls in Hades. If a dead soul attempts to pass beyond the Gates of Hades
and back into the land of the living, Cerberus attacks relentlessly until
that soul returns to Hades. If slain, the soul is immediately devoured by
Cerberus and is lost forever. Cerberus is also tasked with keeping living
creatures out of the land of the dead (adventurers being what they are,
they love to journey to Hades). Living creatures that attempt to move past
Cerberus into Hades (through the main gates) are immediately attacked.
Cerberus has a variety of potent attacks with which to carry out his
duties. He usually begins a combat with a terrible, hair-raising howl that
causes panic in those who hear it and fail a saving throw. This panic lasts
for 2d4 rounds. Cerberus’ saliva carries a deadly poison. The dog's center
head can spit a stream of poison to a range of 30 feet. A creature meeting
the gaze of all three heads must make a saving throw or be turned to stone
(basalt, to be precise).

Cerberus is immune to any extraordinary, spell-like, or supernatural
effect or spell that would teleport him or move him from his current
location. Only deities can affect him with such magic. He is immune to
death effects and disintegration and takes only half damage from acid,
cold, electricity and fire.

Guard . . . Dogs?
On a gray plain, covered with a downy soft layer of lichens and
interrupted here and there with gnashing stalagmites hung with garlands
of silvery blossoms, there stands a gate of black bronze. The gate bears
no ornamentation and it is unlocked. No walls stand beside the gate, but it
does pierce an ethereal barrier into the Land of the Dead, abode of Hades.
The gate swings open easily, though it gives an eerie groan. Beyond lies
a heavy gloom and a light, sucking wind that chills the flesh and drowns
the spirit. As one passes through the gate, they find themselves suddenly
far beyond it, on a path of white pebbles edged by black poppies. Ahead
there are pavilions of ghost-white marble, domed and unadorned and
populated by spirits with downcast faces. The spirits do not speak or
move, but one might glimpse one, now and then, bathed in an amber
glow, their face upturned and for a mere moment smiling.

The path behind still leads to the gate, but between the trespasser and the
gate stands a massive, black mastiff, three-headed and sitting on its
haunches, its necks bent down vulture-style to allow its red eyes to leer and
threaten. While one seeks the gate, they will alway find it at the center of
the plain and Cerberus fronting it.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Cerebral Stalker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6+2) or bite (1d8+2)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Consume brain, create zombie, fear gaze, web
Move: 6/3 (burrow)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

Cerebral stalkers are 6-foot tall bipedal creatures with blackish-gray scales
covering their semi-reptilian form. A thick layer of mucus and slime drips
from the creature's body. The cerebral stalker's bestial head sports
vertical-slitted eyes of dull gray and a mouth filled with jagged teeth. Its
hands are large and end in sharpened claws. A creature slain by a cerebral
stalker's bite attack has its brain ripped out and consumed. The empty husk
becomes a zombie in 1d4 rounds. A cerebral stalker's gaze instills fear (as
per the spell of the same name) and three times per day, it can shoot sticky
webbing from its body (as per a web spell).

Brrrrraaaiiiinnnsssss!
This large natural chamber overflows with zombies. At least 20 undead shuffle
about the 50-foot-wide cavern, their eyes dull and lifeless. The sounds of
their moaning bounces off the rocks. At the far end of the room,
a 15-foot-tall hollow onyx skull hangs down from the ceiling, suspended about
10 feet over a flat brass altar. Blood drips down from a woman's torn body
caught in the skull's carved teeth to spatter on the altar's engraved surface.
Chunks of flesh and other unrecognizable bits of gore litter the brass plate.
Behind the skull, a set of narrow stairs carved into the rock leads upward.

The stairs lead up to a cemetery crypt in the small village of Silhaven.
Dismembered bodies lie in puddles of blood throughout the village, and the
wails of people trapped inside the church can be heard. The church's doors and
windows are boarded up from the inside, and 10 more zombies surround the
structure, clawing at the building as they try to get at the tasty flesh
trapped inside.

A cerebral stalker lairs in the underground temple. The zombies are Silhaven
villagers it killed after finding this forgotten room beneath the town. The
creature sleeps in the skull's lower jawbone and watches out the eye sockets
if anyone enters the room. It uses its fear gaze on anyone meeting its stare,
and leaps from the skull to attack while its zombies overrun intruders.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Chain Worm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d6) and tail sting (2d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Poison, trilling
Move: 9/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

A chain worm is a massive centipede with a bright, reflective silver
carapace. Its legs are dull silver and its oversized mandibles are black.
A dull black stinger is located at the rear of its body. Chain worms stand
nearly 6 feet tall and are about 10 feet long. By rapidly vibrating its
carapace, a chain worm emits a high-pitched trilling sound that stuns and
deafens all creatures within 30 feet (save resists).

As the Worm Turns
A thin, undulating portal of yellowish goo hangs suspended in the
middle of this barren 80-foot square room, held upright by a gleaming
silver frame carved with images of conquering worms consuming
writhing humans. The goo wobbles if touched, but doesn’t break, despite
appearing to be paper thin. The chamber is nearly 60 feet tall.

The silver frame is a foot in diameter and stands nearly 15 feet tall. It is
10 feet wide from side to side and sits in the center of a 15-foot-diameter
silver disk flush with the marble floor. A 20-foot-long chain worm skitters
along the outer edge of the disk in a one-foot-wide groove, its movement
causing the entire disk to rotate slowly. The worm ignores PCs unless
they try to enter the frame or stop it from running in circles around the
groove.

If the platform stops rotating, the shimmering goo pulses with an
audible thrumming. Within 2d4 rounds of standing still, a purple worm is
expelled through the goo curtain into the chamber. The portal could lead
PCs anywhere the Game Referee wishes.

Purple Worm: HD 15; AC 6[13]; Atk 1 bite (2d12), 1 sting (1d8
+ poison); Move 9; Save 3; CL/XP 17/3500; Special: Poison
sting, swallow whole.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Cherum
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 24
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attacks: 2 claws (2d8 + 1d6 fire) and bite (4d6 + 1d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fiery aura, swallow whole, regenerate 5 hp/
round, immune to fire and poison, vulnerable to cold, spell
resistance (30%)
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 27/6,500

This hairless mountain of slick raw burning flesh constantly sizzles and
oozes with the stench of burning fat. Two long meaty arms sprout from a
hugely obese frame; its head appears to be little more than a bald sloping
brow with black pits for eyes. Its maw splits open to reveal cavernous
jaws, teeth glowing like huge red hot coals. A cherum stands about 70
feet tall and weighs well over 40,000 pounds. Anyone within 40 feet
of a cherum takes 6d6 points of fire damage each round (save for half)
from the blazing heat radiating off the creature's body. If a cherum rolls
a natural 20 on its bite attack, it swallows an opponent whole and does
an automatic 4d6 points of damage each round to the creature. Cherum's
heal 5 hp per round while touching flame or lava.

The Burning Crater of Ashgaba
Nearly a century ago a massive underground cavern collapsed near the
sprawling city of Ashgaba on the outskirts of the Kanderi Desert. A cherum
burrowing up from the depths caused the collapse. Natural gas swept into
the city, killing most of the citizens overnight as the toxic fumes washed
over dwellings. Flames ignited the gas, causing even more devastation.
The gas in the city has since burnt off, and people have resettled the oasis
city. The collapsed cavern left a massive crater just outside the walls of
the city. The crater burns continuously as natural gas seeps through the
rubble of the collapse. The result is a 100-foot-deep crater more than 600
feet across with a bowl-shaped floor filled with flaming rocks.

The citizens of Ashgaba blame the destruction of their city on the anger
of the gods. Twice each year during a solar eclipse, Ashgaba holds a mass
ritual sacrifice to appease the gods. They sacrifice eight virgins (two for
each of the elements) by casting them into the flaming crater. The cherum
remains in the bottom of the crater, content with the constant sacrifices.
The cherum becomes quite angry if its needs are not met.

Elgra, an elderly woman, pleads on the streets for someone to save her
teenage granddaughter, her only surviving relative. Darvaza was selected
to be sacrificed during the next eclipse in 10 days. If Darvaza is rescued,
Elgra offers Darvaza and her dowry as a reward for saving her grandchild.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Chrystone
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Longsword (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Breath weapon, spells, immune to magic,
resistance to non-magical weapons (50%), shatter weapons
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Chrystones are humanoid creatures made of rock and crystal that
normally stand just over 5 feet tall. Their coloration varies by the types
of crystal and rock they absorb, giving each chrystone a unique pattern
of striations and coloration that makes them easy to tell apart. Originally
imbued with life by a spellcaster in a ritual involving the blood of several
dragons and a demon, chrystones grow new offspring through budding.
To form a new bud, a chrystone must consume several times its weight in
crystals and consume at least 300 gp worth of gems. The bud continues to
grow from the chrystone's back until it is large enough to separate. Each
chrystone offspring retains the memories and knowledge of its entire
parental line.

In battle, a chrystone can exhale a 20-foot cone of rainbow colors up to
three times per day. Creatures with 2 HD or less are blinded and knocked
unconscious for 2d4 rounds and remain blinded for an additional 1d4
rounds after regaining consciousness. Creatures with 3 or more HD
are blinded for 1d4 rounds. Sightless creatures are not affected by the
chrystone's breath weapon.

Chrystones can use the stone shape spell at will and the stone tell spell
twice per day. They are immune to all spells save transmute rock to mud,
which slows them for 2d6 rounds, transmute mud to rock, which restores
all lost hp to them, stone shape, which acts as a cure light wounds
spell, and stone to flesh, which does not turn them into flesh, but does
negate their immunity to magic for 1 round.

Whenever a character strikes a chrystone with a weapon (magical or
nonmagical), the wielder must succeed on a saving throw or shatter into
pieces. A magic weapon adds its own bonus to the saving throw. If the
weapon breaks, the chrystone takes no damage from the attack.
When a chrystone is destroyed, it shatters, spraying razor-sharp
fragments from its form. Creatures within 5 feet of the chrystone take 2d6
points of damage. A saving throw halves the damage.

Rock Band
The broad valley of the basalt pillars and the sheer bordering cliffs is a
land of unceasing war. The largest of the pillars serve as fortresses with
cunningly hidden entrances and arrow slits, each occupied by a squad
of 1d6+14 chrystones. The prismatic crystalline creatures hide in their
fortresses, hoarding gems and jewels they have stolen from travelers,
one another, or retrieved from the ground. They drive their kobold slaves
lower and lower, watching intently to make sure they do not undermine
their own fortresses. Scouts sit atop each tower, watching the other
scouts, hurling insults from time to time or rushing down into the fortress
to announce the presence of outsiders.

When outsiders come to the valley, the pillars disgorge their warriors,
who surround the hapless travelers demanding gems and fighting with the
other chrystones for the right to the visitor's wealth. Perhaps someday one
conglomerate of chrystones will destroy the others and found a kingdom
in the valley, but given the requirements for budding and the enmity and
cunning of the kobold slaves, this is unlikely.

Credit: The Chrystone first appeared in the Necromancer Games module Hall of
the Rainbow Mage by Patrick Lawinger (©2002, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Author Patrick Lawinger.

Chupacabra
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3) and bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Drain blood
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

The chupacabra is a fur-covered bipedal creature is 3 or 4 feet tall
with a hunched back, red eyes, and a mouth filled with sharpened teeth.
A flexible rows of spines run down its back. Chupacabras are small
terrifying bloodsuckers that lurk on the fringes of society, emerging at
night to drain the blood of warm-blooded creatures. If a chupacabra hits
a single opponent with both claws, it latches on and begins sucking the
creatures blood with an automatic bite attack that does 1d4 points of
damage each round thereafter. There is a 10% chance that any chupacabra
encountered has wings (Fly 15).

The Child in the Well
A crowd of people gathers around a stone well in the center of the small
village of Reynwald. A few hold ropes and even a short ladder. People are
pushing and jostling to get to the front of the group to see what's going
on. Nearly 20 people are crowded around the scene, nearly the entire
community. Jurgen Horstman, the village elder, tries to keep order. The
villagers think a small child has fallen into the dry well, and are frantic to
save the youth. They can just barely see him moving around in the dark
at the bottom of the 60-foot-deep pit. A few are breaking out torches as
the sun sets.

The “child” is actually a chupacabra lurking at the bottom of the well as
bait. It is part of a colony of 10 that lives under the town in a large cavern
containing a dry underground lake. The lake used to feed the well before
it dried up. The chupacabras expanded the small opening to get into the
well, and were going to invade the town that night. Instead, someone
heard one of the diggers clawing at the tunnel and thought it was a child
trying to get out. Anyone lowered into the well is dragged into the side
tunnel where the chupacabra wait in the darkness.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Church Grim
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Howl, +1 or better weapons to hit, soul defender
Move: 15
Alignment: Lawful
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Church grims are good sprits that guard cemeteries from those who seek to
steal from the dead, or those who wish to desecrate the sanctity of the graves
there. They appear as large black dogs, roving protectively among the
tombstones at night. The eyes of a church grim see all evil that crosses into
its territory, and it spares no mercy for such trespassers. The howl of
a church grim causes any Chaotic creature to save or flee in terror for 2d4
rounds (save resists). Church grims are partly incorporeal, requiring +1 or
better weapons to hit. A church grim that is destroyed reforms in 24 hours.

Animate dead or similar spells to create undead fizzle when a church grim is
around as the creature defends the dead souls under its protection.

Watchers on the Water
The Bunford River winds through the Krieger hills at a leisurely pace,
the 30-foot-deep channel funneling through narrow straits. The water runs
green from floating algae, and glows at night under the full moon. Several
low stone bridges rise barely 10 feet over the water. Several fishing poles
are set in stone holders on the bridge, their long lines dragging in the water.
Floating on the water are several funeral barges, each elaborately
decorated and piled with weapons, shields and gold. Several appear to
have been set ablaze, but haven’t burned completely. The honored dead
rest in silent repose in the center of the floating biers, their arms folded
over their brawny chests. The dead are barbarians from a nearby tribe
killed during a battle with the red dragon Horvoraxx the Crimson Death.
The barges are partially burned from fires set as they were pushed
into the river. A rain squall extinguished the flames not long afterward.
The barges drift until they sink. Five church grims walk alongside the
funeral barges to protect the honored dead and their belongings. The dogs
walk easily atop the slow-moving current, their heads down in a somber,
silent processional. One occasionally raises its head in a mournful howl,
the baying full of grief and pain. The church grims leave creatures on
the banks alone, and only attack someone foolish enough to try to steal
something off one of the barges. They don’t react if PCs fire flaming
arrows into the barges. The incorporeal grims vanish when the barges
burn completely or sink into the deep river.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Churr
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Constrict, howl
Move: 9/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Churrs are savage ape-like creatures found in heavily forested areas.
They are fairly intelligent, standing 8 feet tall and weighing about 800
pounds. If a churr hits a single opponent with both claws, it grabs the foe
and constricts for an additional 1d6 points of damage. A churr can unleash
a frightening howl that causes all creatures within 60 feet to flee in fear
(as per a fear spell) if they fail a save.

Knowledge for All and None
In the northern reaches of the Seething Jungle, hidden far from prying
eyes, a fire-blasted landscape opens among the wild palm fronds and
grasping vines. A village of churr lives on the edges of this forsaken
desolation of blackened lava rock, their dwellings little more than mud
huts dug into the jungle dirt. Sticks and wide-leaf palm fronds cover these
bare huts.

Standing in the middle of the village is a 12-foot-tall smooth black
monolith formed of igneous rock. This black featureless slab of stone has
no markings, and absorbs the sunlight burning down on it. The churr carry
bone clubs and protect the black stone with a fierce passion. The churr
worship the stone as their “god” and claim it speaks to them in sibilant
whispers to guide their lives. Anyone staring at the monolith starts seeing
black sigils move across its depths, and points of unnoticed light sparking
along the edges. Its true purpose is left to the Game Referee to decide.
Before the slab appeared on the volcanic field, the churr fought with
their hands; they quickly learned to craft crude weapons after it appeared.
Outsiders are not permitted to approach the deity and are viciously
attacked if they try. The churr fear others will take their god and leave
them clawing in the mud again.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Giant Clam
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (swallow)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Acid, surprise on 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Giant clams are generally found in coastal waters no deeper than 60 feet
from the surface of the water. Many species of giant clams subsist strictly
on a diet of sunlight, and as such are never found in deeper waters where
sunlight cannot reach. Such giant clams are generally found in shallow seas
or attached to coral reefs near the surface. Other species of giant clams feed
not only on sunlight but also on what they can filter from the water, usually
small plants and animals, and sometimes the occasional swimmer. A giant
clam moves by pushing out a small “foot” and sliding itself along. Victims of
the giant clam's bite attack must pass a saving throw or be swallowed. The
giant clam uses a slow-acting acid to break down its meals, inflicting 1d2
points of damage each round. Victims lodged inside the creature can escape
with a successful strength check. Otherwise, it opens on its own in 1d4 hours.
clams also serve as final justice for intruders condemned by the whispers of
the sea goddess carried on the salty winds that sweep the coast.

Seafood Cocktail

Credit: At the bottom of a sheer, chalk precipice the giant clams clutter the
bottom of the shallow, silty sea. For lesser folk, the clam fields are best
avoided.  But for the stone giants of the coast, the clams are easy pickings.
The stone giants are cliff divers, vaulting into the chilly waters and
wrestling the giant clams from the bottom. From their shells they make
ceremonial gowns and other tools. The meat is roasted or stewed and the juice
is spiced with mint and imbibed as a cocktail (one few other living creatures
will drink). The

The Giant Clam originally appeared in the First Edition module EX2
Land Beyond the Magic Mirror (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983)
and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Clamor
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: sonic ray (2d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Sonic burst, mimic, +2 magic weapons to hit,
invisibility
Move: 24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A clamor is a strange, extraplanar creature composed entirely of sound
waves. Normally invisible, a clamor looks like a field of shifting patterns
of vibrations and oscillations approximately 5 feet across and about as tall.
Clamors can perfectly mimic any sound they encounter. Clamors tend to
avoid combat, instead staying back and “playing back” any sound they hear.
If attacked, the clamor blasts opponents with a high frequency sonic beam.
If overwhelmed, it uses its sonic burst to escape. This burst of sound can be
heard for miles. Any creature within 100 feet of the clamor must save or be
stunned for 1d3 rounds. Anyone within 50 feet must save or be permanently
deafened. If attacked, the clamor focuses its sonic ray on the opponent.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.


Bar Fight
The Ruddy Rooster is alive with pretty maids dancing, men singing
uproariously near the hearth, and celebrating patrons toasting the magic-user
Zandon the Unpredictable. The magic-user recently (and quite by accident)
drove off a horde of mimis infesting the city's grain silo. The miniature
pranksters moved on, but decided to leave one last surprise for the townsfolk.

When the Rooster opened, the barkeep found 6 casks of wine lined up on the
bar. A large red ribbon wrapped twice around the barrels. A bow sprinkled with
glittering pollen sat on top. A note in flourishing handwriting read: “For
Zandon, Raise a Glass – Loudly – For All He Does.”

The tavern has tapped three of the kegs, and is pouring wine freely to anyone
wanting a glass. Zandon sits in the middle of the revelry, downing glass after
glass and getting quite drunk.

The fourth keg holds the mimis’ surprise: They trapped a clamor in the cask as
a farewell present to the town.  Tapping the keg causes the barrel to explode
and the clamor rises into the middle of the tavern.


CLOCKWORKS

Clockworks are the creations of powerful machines called brain gears.  with
spare parts and scrap, and a built-in mechanism allows them to selfrepair even
when seemingly destroyed. The clockwork automatically heals damage at a fixed
rate per round, as given in the clockwork's entry.  Certain attack forms,
typically acid, cold, and fire cannot be self-repaired.  The clockwork's
descriptive text describes the details.

A clockwork with self-repair can repair lost limbs (including its head), but
it takes 3d6 rounds to do so. A clockwork reduced to 0 or less hp is not
destroyed, but begins to self-repair damage at one-half its normal rate
(minimum 1 hit point per round). It still cannot repair damage dealt by acid,
cold, or fire effects. For example, a clockwork with selfrepair 3 normally
regains 3 hp per round. If reduced to 0 or less hp, it regains
1 hit point per round until it has at least 1 hit point (at which time it
  self-repairs at its normal rate).

Each clockwork creature varies from its brethren and each is assigned a task
by the brain gear that created it. Clockworks are automatons and follow orders
without question. It is through these various clockwork creations that brain
gears seek to destroy all living creatures. They come in a wide variety of
shapes and sizes.

The clockwork creations controlled by a brain gear share several
characteristics. Most constructs are immediately destroyed when reduced to
0 hp. Clockworks with the self-repair special quality, however, are not
destroyed at 0 or less hp. While they do cease to function, they continue to
self-repair, only at a slower rate. Once it has self-repaired itself to at
least 1 hit point, the clockwork begins functioning normally again.

Some clockworks (see below) can automatically repair themselves


A.I. Spells Armageddon
The wizard's tomb (place it where you will) was a marvel to people
near and far. On the exterior, a proper crypt of bronze decorated with
automatons that, at different times of the day and year, performed complex
pageants from the life and times of the wizard, from his apprenticeship
to his mastery of the magical arts. What powered the giant clockwork
device was unknown, but it was known that the crypt never wore down
and assumed that some magical agent was responsible for the crypt's
maintenance. At each winter solstice, an automaton of the wizard appears
atop the crypt with a great cauldron, and shooting stars streak from his
fingers as a sinuous marilith rises from the cauldron, flashes its blades and
then returns to the cauldron.

Little do the onlookers know that the appearance of the cauldron offers
them a chance, however slight, of preventing catastrophe. The old wizard
had one final triumph before he expired - the creation of a brain gear. For
decades he had slaved away in his workshop, making his clocks and his
automatons and putting them to work excavating a large tomb, the top of
which would be is marvelous clockwork crypt.

Beneath the surface, in cold, lightless halls, a terrible device was
assembled. The halls now click and clack with the movement of gears
and trip hammers, all centered around the mainspring and the brain gear.
The appearance of the cauldron is the only time a small opening appears
in the crypt - a way into the heart of the machine and the slim chance of
stopping it before it completes the final phase of the wizard's revenge and
unleashes an army of clockworks on the world bent on the final triumph
of machine over man.

Clockwork Brain Gear
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  None
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Control clockworks, dream
Move: 0
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

The original brain gear began as little more than a collection of gears,
chains, counterweights, and levers, but was enhanced and grown into a
controlling intellect through a process very similar to flesh golem creation.
A brain gear in its true form resembles nothing more than a copper or gold
box or cube that shines with a pale blue light. It is immobile, cannot
attack, or speak. The casing of a brain gear is so hard that it ignores up to
5 points of damage from physical attacks.

A brain gear is designed to control the actions of all other clockworks
created by its own creator, relieving the creator of having to oversee
simple operations of the clockworks. It is rumored that some brain gears
occasionally develop an evil intellect and turn their charges against its
creator. Any clockwork that comes within two miles of a brain gear
immediately falls under that brain gear's control. If more than one brain
gear attempts to control a clockwork (or if the clockwork is under the
control of another brain gear or overseer), each gear must make a saving
throw; the brain gear beating its saving throw by the most gains control
of that clockwork.

When a clockwork moves more than 2 miles away from a brain gear, it
continues to perform the last order given to it, but there is a 25% percent
chance each hour that it ceases to function, collapsing into a pile of junk.
If a brain gear later moves within two miles of the destroyed clockwork,
the clockwork can reactivate if it has the self-repair ability. Otherwise, it
remains destroyed.

A brain gear in control of at least one clockwork can use that clockwork
to perceive the world through its senses. This ability has a range of 2
miles. A brain gear can switch control from one clockwork to another
once per round. A brain gear uses this ability to give commands to its
clockworks, allowing the usually mindless creatures to fight with highly
coordinated tactics. Each clockwork is capable of receiving roughly 100
words worth of orders. Anything beyond that is too complicated for the
clockwork to handle.

The brain gear has a limited ability to send psychic messages to multiple
creatures of a particular type (human, ogre, etc) through their dreams.

The secrets of clockwork construction are known only to the brain gear
and to those it employs.

Credit: Clockworks and the Brain Gear first appeared in G1 Siege of Durgam's
Folly by Mike Mearls (©2001, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Mike Mearls and Scott Greene.

Clockwork Drone
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Slam (1d3)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: None
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

Clockwork drones appear as human eyeballs encased within flat, metal disks.
Imbued with magic that allows it to fly, a drone's approach is announced by
a low buzzing sound caused by its tiny gears and pistons working furiously to
maintain this magical field. These clockworks are designed to act as
observers. When a drone finds an advantageous position from which to maintain
its watch, it uses a small, metallic claw on its underside to attach itself to
a surface. Drones usually avoid combat at all costs. When they are pressed
into fighting, they prefer to aid their fellow clockworks by distracting their
enemies.

Credit: Clockworks and the Brain Gear first appeared in G1 Siege of Durgam's
Folly by Mike Mearls (©2001, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Mike Mearls and Scott Greene.

Clockwork Overseer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Slam (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Overseers are a recent invention of the brain gears. They look like threefoot
tall wooden dolls with long, slender limbs. An overseer can journey up to 10
miles away from a brain gear while maintaining contact with it.  An overseer
acts as a field commander for brain gears, controlling up to 20 HD worth of
clockworks that are within 100 feet of its position so long as the overseer
remains within 10 miles of the brain gear. An overseer avoids direct combat at
all costs under direct orders of a brain gear. If cornered with no way of
escaping, an overseer fights, and attempts to flee as soon as possible.

Credit: Clockworks and the Brain Gear first appeared in G1 Siege of Durgam's
Folly by Mike Mearls (©2001, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Mike Mearls and Scott Greene.

Clockwork Parasite
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Control host, self-repair
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Clockwork parasites are fist-sized constructs that resemble mechanical
beetles. They burrow into the skulls of the recently dead and reanimate the
body using electrical impulses to control and direct the corpse. The animated
corpses look and fight like zombies, though they cannot be turned or
controlled. A host brought to 0 or less hp is destroyed, but can be
repaired by the clockwork parasite using its self-repair ability (though this
only works if the host is brought to 0 or less hp; a host does not
gain the self-repair ability of the parasite while “alive”).  A clockwork
parasite regains 3 hp per round. Damage dealt from acid, cold, or fire
effects cannot be self-repaired. If reduced to 0 or less hp, it
regains 1 hit point per round (but still cannot repair damage caused by acid,
cold, or fire effects) until it has at least 1 hit point (at which time it
begins to self-repair at its normal rate of 3 hp per round).

Credit: Clockworks and the Brain Gear first appeared in G1 Siege of Durgam's
Folly by Mike Mearls (©2001, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Mike Mearls and Scott Greene.

Clockwork Scout
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Slam (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: None
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Scouts are constructed to resemble animals commonly found in the area that the
brain gear operates within. Their inner wood and metal workings are covered by
an animal's pelt. Characters have only a 1 in 6 chance to notice the deception
(2 in 6 for demi-humans and 3 in 6 for druids and rangers). This camouflage
helps them move about unnoticed and gives them the opportunity to strike from
ambush. They are designed to serve as the mobile eyes and ears of a clockwork
colony. While still restricted by the 2-mile radius they must remain within to
keep contact with a brain gear, scouts serve an important role as
reconnaissance, patrol, and pursuit troops. Only if the scouts have a chance
to strike from a devastating ambush does the brain gear order them into
battle.

Credit: Clockworks and the Brain Gear first appeared in G1 Siege of Durgam's
Folly by Mike Mearls (©2001, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Mike Mearls and Scott Greene.

Clockwork Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Swarm (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Distraction, minimum damage from slashing and
piercing weapons, self-repair
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A clockwork swarm regains 3 hp per round. Damage dealt from
acid, cold, or fire effects cannot be self-repaired. If a clockwork swarm
takes damage from an area attack, it is unable to repair itself for 1d6
rounds following the attack. If reduced to 0 or less hp, it regains 1
hit point per round (but still cannot repair damage caused by acid, cold,
or fire effects) until it has at least 1 hit point (at which time it begins to
self-repair at its normal rate of 3 hp per round).

Clockwork swarms are a collection of tiny, insect-like clockworks that work
together as a single creature. An individual member of the swarm poses little
threat. Yet when acting in concert, a swarm poses a deadly threat to adventurers.
Much like the clockwork warrior, the clockwork swarm forms a fighting frame
from random pieces of trash, debris, and other cast-offs. The swarm, however,
is much more capable of adapting to new situations and surviving combat.

Unless the individual components of the swarm are destroyed, it simply
reforms and continues its attack. Area of effect attacks, such as burning oil,
fireball, or lightning bolt are the most effective means of destroying the swarm.
A clockwork swarm typically appears as a ramshackle collection of spare parts
and garbage draped in a thick, web-like substance and arranged in a vaguely
humanoid form. Living creatures engulfed by the clockwork swarm must pass
a saving throw or be unable to act during that round.

Credit: Clockworks and the Brain Gear first appeared in G1 Siege of Durgam's
Folly by Mike Mearls (©2001, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Mike Mearls and Scott Greene.

Clockwork Titan
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  Slam (2d8)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Clockwork titans are huge, crab-like mechanical monstrosities. They
have saucer-shaped hulls set atop four spindly legs that allow it to move
with surprising speed and agility. Two iron-shod fists are mounted on the
front of the hull. The clockwork titan has a long reach, and can attack
from behind a line of clockwork warriors.

Credit: Clockworks and the Brain Gear first appeared in G1 Siege of Durgam's
Folly by Mike Mearls (©2001, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Mike Mearls and Scott Greene.

Clockwork Warrior
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Slam (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Self-repair
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Clockwork warriors are constructed from a wide range of materials but
take the same general form of a 6-foot tall armored humanoid. They all
feature a “nervous system” of thin steel wires that controls their individual
pieces. Tiny clockworks that look much like metallic cockroaches infest
the warrior, working to repair damage sustained by this construct. These
tiny clockworks repair 1 hit point per round. Acid, fire, and cold effects
destroy these maintenance clockworks, thus preventing the warrior from
repairing damage from those sources. Unlike clockwork swarms (see
below), the clockworks that repair the warrior lack the intelligence and
sophistication to tackle any other task.

Credit: Clockworks and the Brain Gear first appeared in G1 Siege of Durgam's
Folly by Mike Mearls (©2001, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Mike Mearls and Scott Greene.


Clockwork Bronze Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 14
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 1 Weapon (4d6 plus poison) or 1 fist (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: magic resistance (25%), +1 magic weapon needed
to hit, throw rocks (2d8), lightning heals, immune to most
spells
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3,200

A clockwork bronze giant is a massive automaton standing 25 feet
tall constructed entirely of bronze. Other clockwork giants are rumored
to be crafted of iron, steel, bronze or other metals. Clockworks giants
have no mind of their own and follow commands and orders given by
their creator. Lightning heals a 3 hp per level of the spell cast at a
clockwork bronze giant. They are immune to all other spells.

Zenith of Time
On the plateau of a mountain peak stand seven clockwork bronze giants.
Each one stands at the point of a mosaic eight-pointed star set into the
rock. One of the clockwork giants is missing.
Coral and barnacles cover the first clockwork bronze
giant, as if it has stood in the ocean for a long period
of time. The second bronze clockwork giant stands
tarnished and stained, and rotted vines and moss have
left vein-like striations on the giant's bronze skin.
The third giant is bright and shiny, its highly polished
bronze shell glimmering in the sunlight. The fourth
clockwork giant has muted features, as if it had stood
in an extremely hot setting that softened its features
almost to nonexistence. The next giant wears faded
organic paint and necklaces of chains and crudely
carved skulls. The sixth shows signs of battle, and its
head is missing. Arrows of orcish origin remain wedged
in its body. The seventh dirt-filled giant has plants and
small trees growing from its cavities.
Each of these automated giants holds aloft a mace-like
scepter toward the center of the star. An octahedron-shaped
garnet the size of a human skull tops each scepter. The garnet
tips atop the scepters touch in the air above the center of the star.
Directly below the garnets in the center of the star pattern is a 12-inchdiameter brick hole that descends into the mountainside. The midday sun
faintly sends a red beam of light from the garnets into the hole. The giants
attack anyone disturbing the hole in the ground. Careful study of the star
reveals that the eight-pointed star represents a solar calendar spanning
80-year intervals. Whatever the clockwork bronze giants were designed
for will take place soon.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Clubnek
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and beak (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Burst of speed
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A clubnek is a large flightless bird resembling a green ostrich with an
oversized beak that it uses to pound and bite. Found roaming meadowlands
and forests, it is primarily a herbivore subsisting on a diet of plants and
flowers, though it is given to flights of unpredictability when it takes the
role of hunter and predator. A clubnek stands 7 feet tall and weighs about
350 pounds. Clubneks are generally nonaggressive unless threatened
or frightened, though they are known to occasionally have fits of erratic
behavior that cause them to become quite aggressive. In such a case, they
attack until slain or driven off. If its prey attempts to flee, the clubnek often
runs it down and continues combat. Once every 5 rounds, a clubnek can
move five times its normal speed when it makes a charge.

allowed) that causes shortness of breath and causes the skin around the
mouth and eyes to become dry and brittle. The diseased suffer a -1 penalty
to saving throws and temporarily lose 1 hit point per hit dice or level from
exhaustion. A new saving throw can be made every three days, with back
to back successful saves required to shake off the malady.

Freedom
A flock of 2d4 clubnecks has managed to trap itself within the entrance to
a dungeon. The birds have made a terrible mess of the place and are nearly
starving when adventurers make the mistake of opening the door to their
prison. All at once, the skiddish beasts will bolt for the opening (whether it is
an exit or carries them deeper into the maze), trampling anyone in their path.
The room is now caked with feathers and dung. When disturbed, the
powdery dung might enter the lungs, infecting them with a disease (save

Credit: The Clubnek originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by M.
English.

Cobra Flower
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (1d8 + 1d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Squeeze
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Cobra flowers are tall, slender plants with large, flowering bulbs and
brownish-green roots. Two large, green leaves flank its flowering top, giving
the appearance of a cobra's hood. Its leaves are thin and have transparent
blotches on them. Cobra flowers draw nutrients from sunlight, the soil, and
water, but enjoy a diet of insects, rodents, animals, and even humans and
demi-humans when available. The creatures can be found nesting in forests and
often take up residence near small population areas where they can feed on
humanoids who wander into their area. Many a child's or adult's disappearance
can be attributed to a cobra flower. When a cobra flower detects a living
creature, it remains motionless until its prey is within
5 feet. It then spreads its leafy hood, opens its flowery bulb, and bites its
prey, secreting acidic enzymes to break down and digest the victim. Cobra
flowers can also wrap their thick stems around an opponent with a successful
attack, holding their prey still, squeezing them for 1d8 points of damage per
round and increasing their chance to hit with their bite attack by +2.

Funeral Garland
In an octagonal room of swirled gray marble, measuring 30-ft across. The room
contains 1d3+1 potted cobra flowers, basking under the light of several
spheres hanging from the ceiling. In the center of the room, amidst the cobra
flowers, there lies the dead body of a woman on a marble slab, her flesh eaten
away and her white robes tattered.  The corpse is a wraith, and wears a large,
bronze key around its neck. It waits to attack until one has battled through
the cobra flowers and approached the slab.  The bronze key only works if
struck against the marble slab, releasing a tone that causes one of the stone
walls of the octagonal room to vanish, revealing a chamber containing 3d6
x 1,000 sp and 1d6 x 1,000 gp.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Coffer Corpse
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Slam (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Death grip, weapon resistance, deceiving death,
cause fear
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The coffer corpse is an undead creature formed as the result of an incomplete
death ritual. It looks like a desiccated corpse shrouded in rotting, tattered
funerary clothes. It is often found haunting stranded funeral barges or in
other situations where a corpse has not been delivered to its final resting
place. The creature hates life and attacks living creatures on sight. In
combat, coffer corpses attempt to grasp their opponents around the throat,
strangling them for 1d6 damage per round.

A creature in the coffer corpse's death grip cannot cast spells and can only
break free by rolling an open doors check on a d8. Coffer corpses can only be
harmed by magic weapons, and suffer minimal damage from edged and piercing
weapons. Any time an attack is successful, regardless of the weapon used,
damage dice should be rolled. If apparent (or real, in the case of magical
bludgeoning damage) is 6 or higher, the coffer corpse appears to fall to the
ground, destroyed. If the horror had a victim in its death grip, it will
release its hold and then fall to the ground. On its next turn, however, it
will rise again as if reanimated. A creature viewing this apparent reanimation
must make a saving throw or become panicked for 2d4 rounds.

River of Corpses
Descending a set of narrow, stone stairs, you
find yourself in a long tunnel, the ends of which
disappear into darkness. The middle of the tunnel
is taken up by a slowly flowing river of bilious
green liquid. 1d6 corpses (coffer corpses, as it turns
out) are either floating down the river or have run
aground on the sloping banks, for the cross section of the
tunnel would reveal it to be circular.
It's impossible to walk down the tunnel without getting one's feet
wet, without the use of magic, of course. Spaced irregularly down the
tunnel are openings covered with rusty grates. The entrances are placed
at roughly chest height for an adult male. As soon as one enters the tunnel
and wades a bit in the water (it is 2 feet deep at its deepest), the coffer
corpses animate and attack.
Fleeing more than 120 feet in either direction brings adventurers into
the grips of another 1d6 coffer corpses. The grates covering the exits can
be removed with an open doors roll.

Credit: The Coffer Corpse originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Simon
Eaton.

Jade Colossus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 30
Armor Class: -6 [25]
Attacks: 2 slams (4d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, +3 weapons to hit, immune to fire,
immune to magic
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 36/9,200

Jade colossi are massive constructs standing 35 feet tall and weighing
about 60,000 pounds. It appears as a massive humanoid carved of smooth
green stone. Its body is made up of perfect angles and contours. A jade
colossus pummels a foe with its hardened fists. Once every 1d4 rounds, a
jade colossus can spray a blast of green energy in a 60-foot cone or 120foot line that does 15d6 points of damage (save for half). A creature
slain by this blast is transformed into jade. Disintegrate slows a jade
colossus for 1d6 rounds, while fire heals the construct. It is immune
to all other magic.

When Stars Align
In the middle of the ruined bowl of a collapsed stone amphitheater, a
gleaming marble pedestal rises 6 feet above the blistering desert sands
claiming the ancient city. Low stone steps encircle the raised platform, and
a railing carved with a fantastic depiction of a giant snake chasing its
tail rings the dais. A slender golden pillar standing 3 feet tall sits
in the middle of the platform. A mosaic star pattern inlaid with
gleaming quartz covers the floor of the dais. A small platinumand-gold lamp sits atop the pedestal. The lamp's curling handle
sparkles with inset diamonds and emeralds.
A glowing green crystal dome encases the lamp, completely
covering the top of the gold pedestal. This small dome is
impervious to all efforts to remove it. The pedestal is similarly
enchanted, and anyone striking it feels a heavy weight settle
on their shoulders as if the weight of the world had settled
over them. At the base of the pedestal are seven sevenpointed stars, each one representing a nation of the forsaken
kingdoms of the Lands of Brass.
Engraved in the surface of the golden pedestal, beneath the
dome, are words written in a flowing, mysterious script. The
writing is the Covenant of Brass, and reads “Hail from the
skies of molten metals, where the burning clouds of Ingol rain
liquid fires over the lands of mortal fear. I plead for you, O
Master of Fire and Brass, to now appear.” After the greeting
are written the seven forgotten kingdoms. The names are listed
in alphabetical order. The seven-pointed stars at the base of the
pillar each have the name of one of the kingdoms engraved on
them. If pressed in the correct order by an efreeti as he recites the
Covenant of Brass, the glass dome covering the lamp vanishes
for 1 hour and grants everyone standing on the pedestal a single
wish.
If pressed incorrectly (or by anyone other than an efreeti), the green
glass clouds over, and a jade colossus materializes to destroy the wouldbe thieves.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene and Casey Christofferson.

Cooshee
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14 (12 vs. charm)
Special: Sprint, trip, surprise on 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality (lawful tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Credit: The Cooshee originally appeared in Dragon #67 (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1983) and later in the First Edition module S4 Lost Caverns of
Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and still later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Cooshees are large, 200-pound, 4-foot tall hounds with green and
brown spotted fur, a long, curling tail and ears that taper to points. They
are known throughout the world as elven dogs, for their features resemble
those of elves and they are often found in the employ of elves (who use
them as guards). Though they only bark to warn their masters or other
cooshees, the bark can be heard clearly up to one mile away. Cooshees
enjoy a +2 bonus to save vs. charm effects. Once per hour, they can sprint
at 10 times their normal speed. The victim of a cooshee's bite attack must
pass a saving throw or be knocked prone.

Elven Safari
A pack of 1d6+3 cooshees has treed a kamadan (see that entry) in a large
banyan, awakening 2d4 noisy banderlogs (see that entry) and, thus, most of
the surrounding woodlands. The master of the pack, a 5th level elf fighter/
magic-user, is about 1 turn behind the pack. The elf is mounted on a bay
mare, extraordinarily intelligent, and is dressed in woodland green, a mail
coat and carries a brass hunting horn (worth 40 gp), a longbow, 20 redfletched arrows and a longsword. The hunter seeks the kamadan for its
pituitary glands, required by a wise woman to effect a cure for his lady love.

Corpse Candle
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: Incorporeal touch (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Hypnotic lights
Move: 6/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A corpse candle appears as a translucent image of its living self. Its body
shows little, if any, signs of death. Corpse candles can create dancing,
twisting patterns of light that lure victims toward the colorful aura. A
creature must save or be drawn onward – often into danger such as over
cliffs, through fire or worse.

The Light at the End
A narrow channel of deep water runs down the center of a stone crypt.
Bones are piled in niches along the route, spilling out onto the narrow
ledges running alongside the water. The water is 10 feet deep. It is still and
dark. Each niche is six feet wide and piled with miscellaneous bones from
random corpses stuffed into the space. Ten-foot-tall statues of ancient kings
stand in the spaces between the niches. Each holds a black candle in their
outstretched hands. The candles sputter and flicker, thick tallow dripping
down over the stone hands. Heavy shadows dance across the arched ceiling.
A small boat sits on the edge of the water at the start of the crypt.
The watery channel runs throughout the entire crypt network. One deadend passage opens into a 20-foot-diameter circular room filled with stain

glass panels. The chamber glows with light reflected from candles set in
the statues’ hands and along the walls. The water here is 20 feet deep. An
ancient hag was drowned in chamber 50 years ago when she tried to raise
the dead to do her bidding. The crone rose as a corpse candle that haunts
the crypts, although she prefers to remain in this chamber. Her bones lie
at the bottom of the watery pit.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Corpse Orgy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 14
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 4 slams (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Absorb body, pain shriek, half damage from blunt
weapons
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3,200

A corpse orgy is a large, undulating mass of rotting corpses, sinew,
bones, blood, muscle, mucus, and organs. It resembles an ooze and has
no discernible features (other than the corpse parts that make up its form).
A corpse orgy can absorb the physical body of any creature it has reduced
to 0 hp by moving over it and remaining in contact with it for
at least one full round. When it absorbs a body, the corpse orgy gains
12 temporary hp. A creature whose body is absorbed can only be
raised or resurrected if the corpse orgy that absorbed its body is slain
and the corpse in question is recovered. Twice per day, a corpse orgy can
unleash a piercing shriek from the various heads captured in its form that
deals 8d6 points of damage to all creatures within a 40-foot radius (save
for half).

Dead Drop
The jungle opens into a wide clearing that's been burned through the
foliage. The dirt is churned and broken, and the impressions of hundreds
of feet are pressed into the soft ground. A 10-foot-tall mound of freshly
turned dirt rises in the center of the open area. Corpses are visible in the
dirt hill, with decaying arms, legs and heads pushing out of the earthen
mound. A fresh coat of lye is sprinkled over the raised earth.
Hundreds of human, goblin and other beings are piled in contorted
heaps under the thin dirt layer. All were sacrificed at the temple of alSifon and the remains disposed of in this charnel pit. The dirt and lye only
recently were applied.
A corpse orgy lives in the 10-foot-deep trench, and rises to the surface if
the bodies are disturbed. The corpses above it begin pushing outward as
the thing rises, the remains bursting out of the dirt as if alive. The corpse
orgy attacks anyone bothering its “meal.”

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Corpse Rook
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6) and 3 bites (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Rend
Move: 6/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Corpse rooks resemble large three-headed ravens or crows. Their
feathers are oily black in color and have a pungent, almost sulfuric, odor.
Their beak and talons are bright silver and their eyes are golden. The
creature's wings are tipped with silver and the wingspan measures about
30 feet. From head to tail, the corpse rook is about 12 feet long. A corpse
rook that hits with two or more bites on a single opponent latches on and
tears at the victim's flesh for an additional 2d8 points of damage.

For the Birds
The scourge of the skies over Trivat, Mergond is really not much more
than an amateurish thief at best. He can barely break into anything, his
chances of pickpocketing a blind fool are slim to none, and he can’t move
without tripping over every noisy thing in his path. He's worthless as a
thief, but excels in highway robbery.
What makes Mergond frightening is Moll, his corpse rook mount. He
raised the bird from an egg and lovingly coddles her like a child. He feeds
her dead squirrels from a pouch he carries. He rides on the bird's back in
a special saddle.
A murder of crows fly in formation with Moll when she and Mergond
set off to find gold. Mergond lets Moll sweep down on travelers before
landy to demand tribute. He uses a wand of metal detection to make sure
people don’t hold out the good stuff. Moll has other ideas about what to
take, and wouldn’t mind a horse or a PCs.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Corpsespinner
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d8 + poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Create corpsespun zombie, poison, web
Move: 9/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A corpsespinner is a huge tarantula-like creature, bone white in color
with bands of gray, black, or silver ringing its abdomen and legs. The
average corpsespinner is 15 feet long. Its body is covered in short, bristly
hairs of white or silver. The corpsespinner has a skull-like marking on
its thorax. Its eight eyes are silver, white, or gray. Creatures killed by a
corpsespinner rise in 1 hour as corpsespun zombies. A corpsespinner's
bite delivers a toxic poison, and they can fire sticky strands of webbing up
to 80 feet up to 10 times per day (otherwise similar to a web spell)

Skeleton Key
A 150-foot stretch of hallway disappears into darkness and cobwebs.
Dust covers everything in thick gray layers. Bone lanterns carved to
resemble spiders give off a feeble bluish light. Halfway down the hall
stands a skeleton wearing decaying finery and draped in thick layers
of webbing. Alert PCs notice the skeleton doesn’t touch the floor;
sticky strands hold it aloft. The webs rise into a hollow nook where a
corpsespinner waits, plucking at the webs to make the skeleton move.

The spider toys with intruders by raising the skeleton's arms like a crude
marionette. A gold key on a leather strap dangles enticingly from the
skeleton's right arm.

A 25-foot-long stretch of floor beneath the skeleton is an open pit trap
covered with webs. The thick webs bounce like a trampoline, but a roll of
1-3 on an 8-sided die causes the shroud to rip. PCs who fail a save land
in the pit 10 feet below. Trapped in the pit are 10 corpsespun zombies.
The corpsepinner attacks from above any PCs distracted by the zombies.
The gold key is worth 10 gp, and is enchanted to open any door (3
charges left).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Crab, Monstrous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 12/9 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Monstrous crabs are omnivores and spend most of their time combing
the ocean floors for food. Many act as vegetarians and sustain themselves
on a diet of algae, fungus, and water-based plants, while others act as
scavengers or predators. Some have been known to actively hunt giant
clams and snails (the monstrous crab pries the shell open and devours the
fleshy innards). Still others prefer to dwell in coastal waters and prey upon
land-based creatures that wander too close to the shoreline. Monstrous
crabs are often hunted as food by other races (particularly humans and
sahuagin). They are about the size of a panther.

Guards of the Subterranean Sea
Could the fishermen of the coastal village have ever guessed at what
lie beneath their feet? In the chalky hills, covered in scrawny blackberry
bushes and tufts of yellow-green grass there was an old well, long since
gone dry. Even if it had not gone dry, it was inconvenient to reach, sitting
as it did atop a little mound of treacherous rocks, and there was such a
nice little stream just a stone's throw from the village gate.
Should one ever decide to climb down the well – and why would a
fisherman ever do such a daft thing – they would discover that the
turquoise sea from which they drew their sustenance did not stop at the
sandy beach where they parked their simple boats. Beneath the earth,
that sea continued, strained through undersea tunnels and forming a vast,
lightless sea that supported giant, albino crabs – 2d6 of them usually
loitering at the bottom of that old well, waiting to greet anyone foolish
enough to go exploring.

If one could get past those crabs, and the dozens of their fellows who
would be drawn from the quiet waters to investigate any commotion, they
might venture out onto that sea with its low ceiling and weird, lambent
flames dancing above the glassy surface and beckoning the foolhardy into
the Underworld.

Credit: The Monstrous Crab originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Crabman
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 12/9 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

This giant-sized creature is a bipedal humanoid with a crab-like head,
large hands that end in powerful pincers, feet that are splayed. It is covered
with chitinous plates, reddish-brown in color. Two smaller humanoid
arms protrude below its pincers. Crabmen inhabit coastal waters, hunting
fish and gathering food. Crabmen communicate with others of their race
through a series of hisses and clicks. A typical crabman stands about 9
feet tall. They speak their own language, and more intelligent examples
of their species often speak Common. Crabmen are passive and peaceful
creatures, rarely engaging in combat. Crabmen attack with their claws;
their pincers prevent them from wielding weapons. Their humanoid arms
end in human-like hands and are used for fine dexterity and manipulation;
they are too weak to wield weapons effectively. Crabmen can survive
indefinitely on land and under water. Crabmen make their homes in sea
caves and coastal cliffs. Most tribes are led by male or female elders.

Crabmen as Characters
Crabmen are rather hulking brutes, despite their passive dispositions.
They begin the game with an extra hit dice and are capable of swimming at
a speed of 9. Their chitinous exoskeletons provide an AC of 3 [16], which is
convenient since crabmen are incable of wearing armor or using shields. Their
pincer attacks do 1d6 points of damage - again, this is convenient since they
are incapable of using weapons, their second set of humanoid arms being too
frail for such heavy work.  Crabmen may be fighters, advancing to the 4th
level of ability (5th level with Strength of 17, 6th level with Strength of
18). Rare crabmen with prime requisites of 16 or higher can take up the
profession of druid or magic-user, advancing to a maximum of 3rd level.

High Crustacean Society
A dozen miles across that shallow, subterranean sea, the ceiling rises
high enough that the weird, upside-down towers built there by some
unknown race can only be seen by following up the slowly swaying
chains that descend from their battlements. The crabmen use these chains
to climb into the towers from their own mazelike fortress in the shallows
that they may access the upper world, but they do not relish entering those
monuments to an extinct race, for they exude a peculiar malice for things
born from the sea.

The crabmen of the subterranean sea have whitish-pink shells and
bulbous eyes atop their crimson eye stalks. They have carved for
themselves a fortress of mazelike passages from the living stone that lies
no more than 20 feet below the surface of the sea. Into these corridors,
which sink 50 feet into the sea floor, they herd their fish and raise their
urchins, cultivating them for their toxins (which they turn into effective
anti-ooze medicinal) and to decorate their burrow-like homes dug into the
walls of the corridor.

A total of 2d6 x 20 crabmen dwell in the mazelike fortress, extracting
copper from the sea floor and carrying it to the upper world to smelt and
shape it into tools in forges hidden in the hills. They are ruled by a court
of 3d4 sooks (females) with sorcerous powers. Each female dwells in a
fortified burrow with its own egg chamber, the chamber being secured
and trapped to discourage attacks from outsiders and other crabmen.

Credit: The Crabman originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by Ian Livingstone

Crag Man
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 piercing slams (1d8+2)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Pierce, piercer hellstorm, passwall
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Sometimes called living stalagmites, crag men appear as a normal
stalagmite. In humanoid form, a crag man is a 6-foot tall human-shaped
creature seemingly carved from stone. It is thick and squat and its features
are jagged and broken. Small depressions on its head function as eyes,
though no pupils are present. The crag man has no ears. A ridge on
its “face” running between its eyes serves as a nose and its mouth is a
wide, toothless crevice. Its arms end in powerful fists and its legs end
in humanoid feet. A crag man's hands end in stony points that pierce an
opponent's skin with each slam. Once a day, a crag man can summon
2d10 piercers with a 50% chance of success. A crag man can employ
passwall (as per the spell) once per day.

Dinner is Served
A dead gnoll sits upright on a round rock in the center of this large
natural cavern. The corpse holds a silver knife and fork (1 gp total) in its
lifeless paws. A wooden bowl sits on a flattened stalagmite, the dish filled
with a dried-up rat and and heaps of crushed purple mushrooms. The
gnoll has been dead less than a day.
The makeshift table is a crag man that killed the gnoll and propped the
beast up to “entice” others to investigate. The stalactites hanging from the
cavern's roof are piercers the crag man directs to drop on unsuspecting
PCs.
The gnoll wears a leather belt containing 10 gp, a shiny rock good luck
charm (it didn’t work for him), and a wooden dog whistle that charms a
creature blowing it into falling in love with the next gnoll he meets (save
avoids).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Piercer: HD 3; AC 3[16]; Atk 1 drop and pierce (3d6); Move
1; Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: None.

Crayfish, Monstrous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 9/15 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Giant crayfish are freshwater creatures that dwell on the bottom of seas,
lakes, ponds, and other shallow waters. They are predators and scavengers
and exist on a diet of decaying flesh (dead fish and other water-based
animals), algae, snails, worms, and other animals (including swimmers who
come to close to their lair). Giant crayfish make their homes under rocks or
in underwater tunnels burrowed out by the crayfish. Most underwater tunnels
extend over long distances and include a “chimney” found along the edge
of the water or even as far as 100 feet away from the water which allows
the giant crayfish to enter and exit its passageways onto dry ground. A giant
crayfish can survive out of the water for up to 7 hours before suffocating.

The feast is being held on a barren cairn surrounded by fields of clover
and daisies, many of the flowers having been woven into garlands to
decorate the bride and groom. Visitors are welcome, but though the hill
giant clans have sworn a promise of peace on this day, being around
several dozen drunken hill giants is still very dangerous. Each wedding
guest is required to bestow a valuable gift on the new couple - failure to
do so being considered a grave insult.

Crayfish Fricassee
Trodding through the soggy bayou, you come across a brutish hill giant
armed with a spiked club and a large sling. The hill giant is stalking giant
crayfish for his chieftain's nuptial feast, and has just come across 1d4+1 of
the pincered monstrosities. The hill giant will not refuse help, and if helped
will invite his new friends to the feast.

Credit: The Monstrous Crayfish originally appeared in the First Edition
Monster Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Crucifixion Spirit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: Incorporeal touch (1d8 + paralysis) or crucify soul
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Crucify soul, paralysis
Move: 9/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

A crucifixion spirit is a translucent, gaunt humanoid with injuries to
each wrist and to the arch of each foot. A crucifixion spirit makes no noise
and its face is twisted in eternal pain. Its eyes flicker red. The incorporeal
touch of a crucifixion spirit causes paralysis (save avoids). Five times per
day, the spirit can point at a single target and crucify its soul if it hits its
target. If the target fails a save, his body collapses as his soul is ripped out
of his body and crucified to an X-shaped structure with translucent spikes.
The victim is not dead, but loses 2 levels per round unless he is saved. A
crucified victim can return to its body by making a save, but this leaves
the victim stunned for one round.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Burning Revenge
Six boulders stand upright on the edge of the Corros Desert, the
10-foot-wide flat sides of each massive stone turned to face the harshest
winds blowing off the burning sands. Heavy links of black chain wrap
around each rock. Shackled to the rocks by red-hot metal manacles are
six blackened bodies. Their faces and skin are sandblasted away, leaving
them unidentifiable. Each was a thief sentenced to death and chained to
the Rocks of Woe. The bodies are suspended against the superheated
rocks. A man's head pokes out of the sand in front of the rocks, his wiry
hair flapping in the harsh winds. His skin is streaked with blood. The
howling winds drown his screams.

Four of the dead men hung on the rocks were killers and thugs who
deserved their gruesome fate. Two were innocents wrongly convicted by
Magistrate Chesle, the corrupt judge now buried up to his neck in the
shifting sands. The innocent victims died horrible deaths on the rocks,
and rose mere hours later as crucifixion spirits intent on revenge. Instead
of killing Chesle outright, the pair dragged the elderly man to the desert
hole to die slowly.

Chesle begs for his life and offers PCs gold and land if they free him.
The crucifixion spirits rise out of the rocks supporting their blackened
corpses if anyone helps the judge.

Crypt Thing
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Teleport other, +1 or better weapons to hit, turn as 10 HD monster
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Crypt things are hooded and robed skeletons found sitting in highbacked
chairs, its eyes appearing as small pinpoints of reddish light.  They are
created by spellcasters as tomb guardians. They never leave their assigned
area and never initiate combat. A crypt thing is content to sit (or stand) in
its assigned area so long as intruders do not disturb it or anything in the
assigned area. At the first sign of disturbance however, a crypt thing springs
to life. Its first order of business is to attempt to remove the interlopers
from its assigned area by teleporting them 1d10 x 100 feet in a random
direction (roll 1d4: 1, north; 2, south; 3, east; 4, west). The recipient of
this free, unplanned trip can resist it with a saving throw. A teleported
creature arrives in the closest open space at the determined destination.
A teleported creature can arrive in mid-air rather than on a solid surface, if
the crypt thing wishes.

Crypt Guardian
There exists in some parts of the world (and perhaps only truly in legend;
sages aren’t sure) a variant of the crypt thing known as a crypt guardian.
This variant has all the same abilities and powers as a normal crypt thing,
with the following changes. The variant does not possess the ability to
teleport others. Instead, it can simultaneously paralyze and turn invisible
all creatures within 50 feet. An affected creature can make a saving throw
to negate the effects. Affected creatures remain paralyzed and invisible
for 2d4 days. A new save is allowed each day until the effects are broken,
dispelled, or the duration ends.

Create Crypt Thing
Spell Level: Cleric and Magic-User, 7th Level
Range: 60 feet
Duration: Instantaneous
This spell allows you to animate a single corpse into a crypt thing. This
spell must be cast in the area the creature is to guard or it fails. The
corpse must be mostly intact and must be humanoid-shaped and have a skeletal
system or structure. Only one crypt thing is created with this spell, and it
remains in the area where it was created until destroyed. A black pearl gem
worth at least 300 gp must be placed inside the mouth of the corpse. When the
corpse animates, the gem is destroyed.

Toga Party
Beyond the dusty antechamber there is a long passageway - 60 feet
long - ending in a circular chamber lit by a single everburning brazier.
On one wall there is a crypt, 20 feet long and 15 feet wide, with panes of
amber-colored glass set into the walls - five panes on each wall. The glass
apparently covers small alcoves, for a torch held up to the glass reveals a
mouldering body partially covered in a funeral shroud behind it. A the end
of the chamber there is a brass throne set with two large rubies (red glass,
actually) set in the arms. Sitting in the throne there is a corpse, swathed in
a woolen toga and wearing a brass helm surmounted by a horsehair crest.
The corpse is a crypt thing, and it will certainly teleport intruders far
away. Now, it so happens that on the wall opposite the entrance to the
crypt there is a large mirror - oval and measuring 5 feet tall and 3 feet
wide. The mirror is set in a brass frame made to look like dozens of
sinuous fire nymphs. The mirror is harder than steel and impossible to
shatter, but one can walk through it by holding a burning ember from the
brazier in their fist. Holding the ember in this way inflicts 1d4 points of
(non-lethal) damage.

On the other side of the mirror, one finds an identical crypt, save for the
fact that the throne is made of gold and set with actual rubies and worth
easily 10,000 gp. The corpse on the throne is not a crypt thing, but rather
the body of a long dead sorcerer. The bodies behind the amber glass are
wights, and they will burst through the glass to attack intruders into the
true tomb.

Credit: The Crypt Thing originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission. According to an
article by Don Turnbull in Dragon #55 (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981), the
Crypt Thing was never intended to be an undead creature, though somehow it
evolved into that over the years.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Roger
Musson.

Crystalline Horror
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  Shard spray (3d6) or claw (1d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Shard spray, bend light, +1 or better weapons to
hit, resistance to cold (50%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

A crystalline horror is a weird, unnatural humanoid made entirely of
crystal and glass. It is man-sized and its head sports no eyes, nose, ears, or
mouth. Its body appears razor-sharp and jagged. Its hands end in wicked
claws. The origins of the crystalline horror are shrouded in mystery. A
crystalline horror can loose a spray of razor-sharp shards of glass from its
body in a 40-foot cone. A creature in the area takes 3d6 points of damage
or half that amount if it succeeds on a saving throw. The crystalline horror
can launch only five such sprays in a given day. Victims of any attack
from the crystalline horror must pass an additional saving throw to avoid
having an artery knicked. Unfortunates who fail such a saving throw
suffer an additional 1d4 points of damage each round from bleeding
until the wound is tended or magically healed. In place of attacking, a
crystalline horror can refract natural light into a bright light that radiates
out in a 10-foot spread. Creatures within this area must succeed on a
saving throw or be blinded for 3 rounds.

Crystal Blue Confusion
In an icy cave in the high mountains, very near the blazing sun, a
crystalline horror sits brooding. A skeleton is all that remains of the
remorhaz that once called this cavern home. The crystalline horror puzzles
over a blue metallic cube, a sort of puzzle box. Sadly, the creature's
wickedly sharp claws are too clumsy to work the box.

Should one solve the puzzle (you can have players work on a real puzzle
or allow their characters to attempt three 1d20 rolls, needing to roll under
their intelligence scores on all three rolls) it opens into a strange metallic
spider that roosts on one's shoulder for one hour. During this hour, the
spider protects them from all evil mental effects. When the hour is up,
the creature folds back into a cube and cannot be re-opened (a task which
requires solving a new puzzle or re-rolling against intelligence) for 24
hours.

Fighting in the ice cave is treacherous, with each missed attack or move
of more than 3 feet requiring a saving throw to avoid falling prone and
suffering 1d4 damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Crystallis
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 14
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 claws (2d6+3)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Crystalline claws, wounding, petrification breath
Move: 6/6 (burrow)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

A crystallis is formed of quartz, earth, and crystal and stands about 13
feet tall. Its powerful arms and legs end in razor-sharp claws that glint
and shine like polished steel. Its large rounded head sports two sunken
crystalline eyes and a gaping toothless maw. A crystallis attacks with
razor-sharp crystalline claws that cause opponents to bleed each round for
2 hp of damage until a healing spell is cast on the creature. Once
every 1d4+1 rounds, the creature can breathe a cloud of orange smoke
that fills a 10-foot cube in front of the crystallis. Anyone inside this smoke
must save or be turned into a crystal, gem-encrusted statue.

Rock Garden
This humid cavern drips with condensation. Clear pools of warm
water collect in low spots on the stone floor. Hundreds of fantastic cave
formations are covered with quartz crystals of incredible beauty and
color. Massive teardrop-shaped crystals hang delicately from the ceiling.
Magical light brought into the room causes a dazzling display of brilliant
light to reflect around the chamber. PCs must save or be blinded by the
white glare of the reflected light (-2 to-hit penalty while in the room).
Lanterns, torches and candlelights do not have this effect.
The hanging crystals are caterprisms in cocoons. They are at a delicate
state and quickly die if the cocoon is harmed in anyway. A hermit-like
crystallis tends to his rock garden beneath the hanging cocoons. Several
caterprisms hide among the natural crystal formations. The protective
crystallis dislikes intruders, and attacks anyone harming his garden or
the crystal cocoons. The crystallis and the caterprisms are immune to the
light effects and each other's special attacks. The crystals in this room
have unusual qualities and exceptional clarity. They are highly prized and
valuable.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Daemon, Cacodaemon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  Sword (2d6) or 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spells, only harmed by silver weapons, immunity to
acid and poison, magic resistance (60%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 18/3800

Cacodaemons are tall, sleek, ebony humanoids with long, thick arms
that end in powerful claws. The average cacodaemon stands about 7 feet
tall and weighs about 800 pounds. They have sleek, hairless heads and
bright, fiery red eyes. Their mouths are lined with sharpened teeth and
fangs. They are employed as guards and soldiers in the Oinodaemon's
palace. Cacodaemons are completely loyal to the Oinodaemon and
never question their position or authority; they do not take orders from
any other daemon. Cacodaemons are relentless combatants and never
back down from a fight. They often begin combat by changing forms
and appearing as a race friendly to their potential opponents. Once an
opponent is lured close to the cacodaemon, it changes to its natural form
and attacks. Cacodaemons can cast the following spells: Darkness, ESP,
fear and hold person (3/day).

Slackers
Just beneath a large, oily rock covered in patches of pale, luminescent
lichens that writhe under one's flesh, a squad of 1d5+5 cacodaemons is
slacking off, smoking the ground leaves of the black lotus in stubby pipes
carved from the thigh bones of sinners. The largest of the dull creatures is
telling the others a story of some past battle against a horde of demons and
devils that apparently culminated in his saving the life of the Oinodaemon.
The others are rolling their eyes and glancing at one another sheepishly while
blowing smoke rings. Two of the fiends is kicking a severed head back and
forth between them, the head howling in pain as they do so.  While the others
hold the attention of the adventurers, one cacodaemon is creeping up behind
them.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Daemon, Charon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 32 (128 hp)
Armor Class: -5 [24]
Attack:  Staff (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Control Styx, fear gaze, paralysis, spells, +1 or
better weapons to hit, immunity to acid and poison, magic
resistance (90%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 40/10800

Boatman of the Lower Planes. Charon spends his time ferrying dead souls to
their final resting place in the Lower Planes. He appears as a skeleton
shrouded in a dark hooded robe with small pinpoints of crimson light burning
in his empty eye sockets. He uses a large, flat skiff to ferry his passengers
across the dangerous waters of the River Styx. On occasion, he ferries living
souls to a desired location within the Lower Planes, though he charges a hefty
price for such passage.

A rare and costly (to one's sanity) spell can be used to summon the dread
boatman. Passage for living souls across the River Styx costs a single magic
item, 500 pp, or two gems of at least 1,000 gp total value. If his price is
refused, Charon turns his skiff and moves away. If attacked, Charon attacks
but seeks to escape as soon as possible. Those within 30 feet meeting Charon's
gaze must succeed on a saving throw or be paralyzed with fear for a number of
rounds equal to the value by which they failed their saving throw. A creature
hit by Charon's staff must succeed on a saving throw or be paralyzed for 2d6
minutes. Charon can see through invisibility. Once per day he can trace
a symbol of fear or symbol of stunning. Three times per day, Charon can summon
2d4 charonadaemons. Charon can control the waters of the River Styx as if
using the control water spell. Additionally, he can form a 16 HD water
elemental using this ability. A Styx elemental uses the standard 16 HD water
elemental statistics with the addition that its touch causes feeblemind in
those who fail a saving throw. Charon can roam the planes in its skiff at
will.

Death in a Cup
Near the oily shore of the Styx, you discover a round table of stone. The
table is set with a orichalcum ewer of dark, dry wine and two terracotta
cups painted with black glaze and images of cavorting skeletons. Should
one drop three pomegranate seeds and a copper coin in each cup and fill
them with wine, they will, in the blink of an eye, be startled to see Charon
accepting the cup and holding it to his mouth.

Charon does not drink until his “host” drinks. The wine is, of course,
a deadly poison. Should the host survive his drink (saving throw at -2
penalty), he may initiate negotiations with Charon for passage on his skiff.
If Charon's visitors prove troublesome, they will discover that they are
surrounded by a band of summoned charonadaemons.

Credit: Charon originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Daemon, Charonadaemon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  Staff (1d8)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Fear gaze, spells, only harmed by
silver weapons, immunity to acid and poison,
magic resistance (45%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2900

Charonadaemons resemble their master, Charon, the Boatman of the Lower Planes,
and are often mistaken for him. Unlike their master, they care nothing for
ferrying souls across the River Styx and merely seek to murder or steal from
those that request passage. Travel across the River Styx by a charonadaemon
costs a single magic item, 50 pp, or 2 gems (total value of both gems must be
at least 100 gp). Even if the price is paid, the charonadaemon usually betrays
his passengers, attempting to dump them into the River Styx or kill them
outright. If more money or fare is offered, the charonadaemon might be
persuaded not to attack. A charonadaemon can be summoned to the banks of the
River Styx by casting symbol (any). Those within 30 feet meeting the gaze of
a charonadaemon must succeed on a saving throw or be paralyzed with fear for
a number of rounds equal to the value by which they failed their saving throw.
Charonadaemons can cast, at will, the spells cause fear and darkness, and they
can discern invisible creatures. Charonadaemons can roam the planes in their
skiffs at will.

Credit: The Charonadaemon originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

A Boatman in the Lower Planes
On the shores of a subterranean sea, on a beach of gleaming,
white sand, you come across a skeletal, robed figure standing on
his skiff, looking absent-mindedly towards the mouth of a cave.
The charonadaemon was summoned by an inhabitant of the Lower
Planes to deliver them to the Material Plane and wait precisely 24
hours for its return with an important captive and message for the
Oinodaemon. Every few minutes the charonadaemon holds aloft
an hourglass and check the gray sands within.

There is a 3 in 6 chance that the passenger of the skiff, a cacodaemon,
finally appears, a bound and gagged drow priestess slung over its shoulder.
Should it appear, it ignores the adventurers unless they oppose it - either
way, the charonadaemon gives it no aid other than to seize the priestess and
deposit her on its skiff.  If the cacodaemon does not appear in time, the
charonadaemon will launch its skiff and soon disappear from view. If the
adventurers move quickly, they can hire the charonadaemon, who goes by the
name of Blackjack and has a habit of referring to itself in the third person.

Daemon, Derghodaemon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  5 claws (1d4) or 2 claws (1d4) and 3 swords (2d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Feeblemind, spells, only harmed by silver weapons, immunity to acid and poison, magic resistance (50%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3200

The derghodaemon is one of the strongest of the daemon races, but its low
intelligence has relegated it to a position of brute warrior and little more.
It is a tall, bloated, insect-like creature with five arms and three legs. Each
of its arms ends in a sharpened, clawed hand. Its legs end in four-toed feet.
Its flesh is mottled green and black and its eyes are large and black with no
pupils. A derghodaemon stands 8 feet tall and weighs about 800 pounds.
Twice per day, by clicking its mandibles, a derghodaemon can affect all
creatures within 30 feet as if by a feeblemind spell. A derghodaemon's
head can rotate 360 degrees, making it almost impossible to surprise the
creatures or back stab them. In addition, they can see invisible creatures.
Derghodaemons can cast, at will, the spells cause fear, darkness and sleep.

Credit: The Derghodaemon originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Fun and Games
A bloated, dim-witted dhergodaemon is rolling a massive, spherical
stone up a barren, windswept hill. The stone is composed of a reddish
black material that glows with an inner fire. The dhergodaemon will
generally ignore adventurers unless they become bothersome, but it is not
averse to chatting with them while it goes about its duties.

The strange stone is actually the egg of a fiendish roc, and the
dhergodaemon is rolling it to the campsite of 1d3 other dhergodaemons,
who intend to feast on it. Naturally, adventurers will be invited to share in
this feast, though they will find the flesh of the roc bitter and nauseating.
After devouring the embryonic roc, the dhergodaemons engage in a
dizzying game of five-handed rock/paper/scissors.

Five adventurers can engage a single dhergodaemon in the game, each
having a 3 in 6 chance of besting one of the daemon's arms. If they can
best all five arms at once, the dhergodaemon will give out a chattering,
wheezing laugh and offer them a bent golden coin that, it assures them,
grants them entry and a single day's peace in any stronghold they should
encounter in the Lower Planes.

Daemon, Guardian
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  Bite (2d6), 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Breath weapon, +1 or better weapon to hit, immunity
to acid and poison, limited domain, telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos or Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1700

A guardian daemon is summoned to the Material Plane by a spellcaster
with the task of guarding an area or treasure. These daemons vary in size
and appearance, though most resemble large bears, wild cats, or apes with
added daemonic characteristics (horns, elongated fangs and nails, and so
on). Despite its varying appearance and form, the guardian daemon is a
dangerous adversary. Most guardian daemons are of neutral slant, though
many, due to their daemonic heritage, are chaotic and usually only serve
those of like alignment.
A guardian daemon only initiates combat if the area it is guarding is
entered or the treasure it is watching over is disturbed. The realm of a
guardian daemon encompasses only the area it is summoned to guard; a
room, chamber, or treasure. The guardian daemon can wander freely in its
area, but cannot move beyond the precincts of the designated area.
Three times per day a guardian daemon can breathe a cone of fire 30
feet long with a 15-foot wide base. This cone of fire deals 5d6 points of
damage (save for half damage).
Guardian daemons are immune to mind-affecting effects (charms,
compulsions, phantasms, patterns, and morale effects), sleep, hold, and
polymorph. They cannot be harmed by acid and poison.

Credit: The Guardian Daemon originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian
McDowall.

Lifeguard
A floating caravan of nine covered barges is making its way down a
wide, golden river. Eight of the barges are carrying barrels of rice, plums,
dried fish and other foodstuffs, along with 2 or 3 traders. One of the
barges carries a lacquered altar case painted in gold dragons and sealed
with a puzzle lock. Inside the case there are three peaches. One is a single
peach of immortality (treat as a potion of longevity), while the other two
contain deadly poison.
Lurking in the shadows of the barge is a guardian daemon that resembles
a foo lion, with curved horns and skin that looks like golden marble. At
first blush, one might easily mistake the daemon for a statue. The daemon
can be placated by playing a bamboo flute. The men who steer the barge
(3rd level assassins) carry such flutes in their sashes, along with poisoned
daggers and lengths of chain. The caravan is on its way from a monastery
high in the mountains to the palace of the emperor.

Daemon, Hydrodaemon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6), bite (2d6) or spit (see below)
Saving Throw: Spittle, spells, only hamed by silver weapons,
immunity to acid and poison, magic resistance (35%),
telepathy 100 ft.
Special: 9
Move: 9/24/12 (swimming/flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

Hydrodaemons are frog-like daemons that swim the River Styx. They
are the only known creatures in existence that can touch the waters of the
Styx without suffering any ill effects. Hydrodaemons are 10 feet tall and
weight about 4,000 pounds. Large flaps of skin under their arms allow
them to glide when leaping. The flesh of a hydrodaemon is warty and
green. Its eyes are a sickly yellow in color. Up to five times per day a
hydrodaemon can expel a 20-foot long line of sputum that causes those
hit to save vs. sleep (as the spell) for 6 rounds. Hydrodaemons can, at will,
cast cause fear, darkness, detect magic and dimension door. Once per day,
they can summon an 8 HD water elemental.

On Noisome Pond
On the banks of a noisesome pond, a hydrodaemon lurks. Summoned
some ages before by a midling demonologist who got in way over his
head (literally), the beast has since dwelled in this old mill pond that once
served a large village, now abandoned. The mill is now crumbling, the
interior coated in the dried spittle of the hydrodaemon, now a viscous
ooze that acts as a contact poison (save at +3 or become drowsy for 1
hour, suffering a -1 penalty to all dice rolls).

The hydrodaemon lurks beneath the surface of the water, waiting for
a single victim to stroll close. At this point, it strikes with its spittle and
then leaps from the water to grab its dozing victim and drag them under
the water.

In the shallows one may find numerous skeletons, mostly those of
peasants in tattered and ruined woollens and leathers, but one skeleton
belonged to a sorceress who still grips a wand of enemy detection, and
another is the remains of a knight in +1 gothic plate armor that still
gleams after spending several years in the muck.

Credit: The Hydrodaemon originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Daemon, The Oinodaemon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 25 (100 hp)
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  2 slams (2d6 plus disease)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Disease, spells, Staff of the Lower Planes, transfixing
gaze, +2 or better weapon to hit, magic resistance (90%),
immune to disease and poison, telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 34/8600

The Oinodaemon claims rulership over all other daemons. There is no other
single figure in the lower planes that commands more respect (and fear) than
the Oinodaemon (excepting a few powerful arch devils). His position is
constantly threatened by those that would usurp the throne and take the
position for themselves. There are believed to be at least seven other
extremely powerful daemons vying for the throne and title.  Through subtle
machinations, sheer power, and fear, the Oinodaemon has staved them off thus
far.

The Oinodaemon stands 9 feet tall. Its head resembles that of a diseased and
rotting ram with downward, forward-curving horns. The wool and flesh of its
humanoid body seem to pull away or drop away in sickly clumps. Its body is
covered in boils, blisters, sores and scabs. Thick, white foam oozes from its
mouth and a thin yellow ichor squeezes from its bloodshot eyes.

The touch of the Oinodaemon carries with its the daemon plague, a terrible
disease that prevents magical and natural healing and rots the flesh while the
victim yet lives. A person afflicted with the daemon plague is contagious
until it dies, usually in one week.  Oinodaemon's gaze transfixes one target
per round unless a saving throw is made. The transfixed target cannot move
until permitted to do so.  Oinodaemon can cast spells as a 12th level cleric,
as well as detect magic, dispel magic and invisibility at will and feeblemind
once per day. Once per day, his touch can act as a rod of cancellation.

Staff of the Lower Planes: This 12-foot long, black wooden staff can only be
wielded by the current Oinodaemon or any daemon he allows to wield it. In
anyone else's hands, the staff functions as a normal quarterstaff. Upon the
current Oinodaemon's death, the staff can be wielded (and it functions as
detailed below) by the new Oinodaemon. The staff has the power of a staff of
withering and can cast a charm monster spell that affects up to 20 targets,
can lay a geas upon a person and can grant another's wish.

Servants of the Oinodaemon Followers of the Oinodaemon are usually evil
humanoids and often consist of clerics and necromancers.  Clerics of the
Oinodaemon are called Servants of Decay and must sign a pact of evil with the
Oinodaemon.  Servants of Decay can receive cleric spells up to 3rd level from
the Oinodaemon.

Credit: Anthraxus (The Oinodaemon) originally appeared in the First Edition
Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Welcome to the Feast
As one tromps over the bleak wastes of the Lower Planes, they might
discern on the horizon a looming shape - large and a dull, soul-sucking
black. In mere moments it will be upon them, moving rapidly - a long
corridor, hung in green, tapestry-like fungi, battered, rotting furniture,
corroded copper candlesticks with dropping tapers, massive vases of
terracotta filled with skulls - all moving rapidly past the adventurers
before it finally and suddenly stops. The adventurers now find themselves
facing a great door of rusted iron, the surface cast in the shape of terrible
grotesques - beautiful lords and damsels, their joints twisted with palsey,
their faces wracked with pox, starving dogs nipping at their hands, carrion
crows pulling at their ears.
The doors are heavy, but swing open with some effort revealing a
dank, damp chamber - a mockery of a feast hall furnished with a long,
warped table covered in rotting victules picked over by giant, fiendish
rats with the faces of dirty, runny-nosed urchins. At either end of the hall
there is a great hearth filled with hellfire that gives out great gouts of
oily, black smoke that fills the ceiling of the hall and provides no heat or
comfort. Beyond the table, on a raised platform sits the lord of the feast,
the Oinodaemon, and his court of seven rivals, all hidden beneath thick
shrouds of dingy lace.
Each adventurer who has killed a daemon is commanded to come
forward and take a place at the disgusting feast, a cacodaemon appearing
behind them to guide them to their seat and place a goblet of thick, murky
liquid before them. Those who have not killed a daemon are branded
cowards and clapped in irons, their comrades finding it impossible to rise
from the table until they have quaffed the rheumy mead that has been set
before them.
The mead carries the daemon plague, of course. Those that die from the
plague are reincarnated upon death as daemons.
Those that survive are granted safe passage
through the Lower Planes - at least in the
presence of daemons.

Daemon, Piscodaemon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  2 claws (2d6), mouth tentacles (1d8 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Constrict, poison, spells, vorpal strike, only harmed
by silver weapons, immunity to acid and poison, magic
resistance (50%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 9/18 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4400

Piscodaemons look like 7-foot tall bipedal lobsters with long, gangly
arms that end in powerful pincers. It has a short, fish-like tail on its
posterior and a centipede-like head with several small tentacles located
beneath its mouth and looking like a writhing beard. Piscodaemons are
found throughout the Lower Planes bullying and killing weaker creatures.
They are often themselves used as cannon fodder or slaves by the more
powerful races of the Lower Planes. If a piscodaemon scores a natural
20 on its attack roll with a claw attack and its victim fails a saving throw,
it severs one of the opponent's extremities (roll 1d6: 1-3 arm, 4-6 leg;
50% chance of either right or left). A piscodaemon's mouth tentacles are
poisonous, affecting a victim as though with a slow spell for 1 minute
if a saving throw is failed. Piscodaemons can cast the following spells:
Blink, cause fear, darkness, stinking cloud and mirror image (2/day). The
piscodaemon's faceted eyes can see in all directions, making it difficult to
surprise. In addition, they can see invisible creatures and objects.

A Chip on the Shoulder
A solitary piscodaemon stalks across a landscape of twisted stone
formations draped with brilliant reptilian skins that shimmer as though
covered with jewels. The formations are separated by narrow gullies of
freezing sand.
The piscodaemon and his fellows were set upon by a roaving band
of mariliths, with this single specimen surviving the onslaught. It is
now making its way back to its comrades with a king-sized chip on its
chitinous shoulder. The piscodaemon would like nothing better than to
unleash its fury on a band of outsiders, but it is wily enough to avoid
a conflict it cannot hope to win, for it carries a stone tablet back to the
greater daemon it serves.
The tablet contains the true name of a powerful bal-rukh in the language
of demons. The tablet is composed of polished obsidian.

Credit: The Piscodaemon originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Dakon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 12/12 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Dakons are a race of intelligent apes that make their homes in the warmer
regions of the world, though rarely, if ever, near a large expanse of water
as they simply don’t trust the stuff. They are generally friendly toward
humans who share their alignment, and view all other races (even those
races of the same alignment as the dakons) with caution and suspicion.
Dakons stand 8 feet tall and weigh about 500 pounds. Dakons speak their
own language and might speak Common if they dwell near humans.
Dakons are very passive and docile creatures; they rarely attack except in
self-defense. If forced into combat, a dakon attacks with its claws.
Skills: Dakons have a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and can always
choose to take 10 on a Climb check, even if rushed or threatened.

Dakons as Characters Dakon characters enjoy a +1 bonus to Strength at character
creation, though starting Strength cannot be higher than 18. Their large size
and long arms allow them a +1 bonus to attacks involving grappling and they
climb as well as a thief of equal level. A dakon's unarmed attacks inflict 1d4
damage instead of the normal 1d2. Dakon characters can see in the dark as well
as elves. Dakons can take levels in fighter (advancing up to 7th level, or 8th
level if their Strength score is 15 or higher) or magic-user (advancing up to
4th level, or 5th level if their Intelligence score is 15 or higher).

Credit: The Dakon originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (© TSR/
Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian McDowall.

Gentle Masters
You come across a village sheltered by the overarching trees of the
rain forest. The village is built near a small, swift stream and consists
of several adobe buildings, some quite grand and a palisade of bamboo.
The village is inhabited by 2d4 x 10 dakons. The dakons dwell in family
bands, each in its own building. The buildings are domed structures, like
large, mud brick igloos. The interiors are decorated with mosaics of stone
and colorful glazes.
The village is ruled by several elder males with silvery fur. The elders
are all druids of level 1d3+1. The dakon are friendly, though hesitant to
allow travelers into their village without some gift of great value to prove
their friendship. The villagers subsist on jungle vermin, fruits gathered in
the forest and roots grown in their hidden gardens. The gardens are tended
by bands of human servants, who trade their labor for the protection of
the dakon. The dakon treat these servants gently, but consider them little
more than beasts of burden or pets.

Dark Creeper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Dagger (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Darkness, death throes, light blindness, surprise on
1-2 on 1d6
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality (with chaotic inclinations)
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Dark creepers are dwellers that make their homes in the twisting passages
and caverns of the subterranean world. They are small, thin humanoids with
gray skin and eyes. Dark creepers dress in dark, filthy robes and smell of dung
and rotted meat. When dark creepers’ clothing begins to rot with age and fall
from their bodies, they simply add another layer, rather than remove the tattered
rags. Dark creepers speak their own babbling language (known as Darkling)
understandable only by other dark creepers and dark stalkers (see that entry).
Three times per day, a dark creeper can create an effect identical to the darkness
spell. Dark creepers can see in all forms of darkness, including magical
darkness. They also continuously detect magic. Abrupt exposure to bright light
blinds dark creepers for 1d3 rounds. When killed, a dark creeper spontaneously
explodes in a flash of white-hot light. All creatures within a 10-foot radius must
succeed on a saving throw or be blinded for 1d6 x 10 minutes.

Credit: The Dark Creeper originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Rik
Shepard.

Sneak Thieves
In the dark of the tunnel you see a small, cloaked figure sitting alone,
hunched over some bauble in its hands and babbling like an idiot. From
a distance, it looks as though it might be a dwarf or halfling, but as one
approaches, it turns its head and you see the gray skin and the weird, gray
eyes.

In the blink of an eye, the tunnel fills with a thick, impenetrable darkness
and 1d6+1 additional dark creepers attack from forward and back, half of them
having apparently trailing the adventurers for some time. The original dark
creeper's bauble is a silver locket holding a strand of violet hair that once
belonged to a high elven countess whose beauty was a legend. A portrait of the
lady is painted inside the locket and the words “For Maximilian” are engraved
on the back of the locket in the elven script.

Dark Stalker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Short sword (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Darkness, fog cloud, death throes, light blindness,
surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality (with a proclivity for chaos)
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

of escape possible. Three times per day, a dark stalker can create an effect
identical to the darkness spell. Twice per day, a dark stalker can create a fog
cloud (as obscuring mist). A dark stalker can continuously detect magic as
the spell. Dark stalkers can see perfectly in darkness of any kind, including
magical darkness. Abrupt exposure to bright light blinds dark stalkers for
1d3 rounds. When killed, a dark stalker spontaneously explodes in a flash
of white-hot flame equal to a three dice fireball spell (save for half damage).
Dark creepers within 60 feet that witness a dark stalker's death throes must
succeed on a saving throw or flee in terror for 1d6 rounds.

If the dark creeper is rarely seen, the dark stalker is even rarer. They are
the leaders and commanders of the dark creepers and rule the subterranean
cities through might and fear. Dark stalkers are
man-sized and have pallid skin. They wear
the same type of filthy dark robes and
clothes as the dark creepers. Dark
stalkers speak their own babbling
language understandable only to
other dark stalkers and dark
creepers. Some of the more
intelligent dark stalkers
speak Common. Dark
stalkers
generally
try to avoid combat,
using their powers to
cover their escape. If
forced into combat,
they attack using their
short swords, which they
prefer to poison. If defeat
is imminent, a dark stalker
seeks the quickest means

Cult Leader
In a vast cavern, approximately 200 feet in diameter, with a high ceiling
you discover numerous piles of junk. The piles contain all manner of
refuse - rusted armor, broken weapons, candle stubs, bits of cord and rope
- as well as a few good, even valuable items. The junkyard is the abode of
1d4 x 10 dark creepers and their leader, a dark stalker.
The darklings have been collecting bits and pieces for ages, and there
is a 1% chance that any useful item resides in the yard, and a 1 in 1000
chance that a minor magic item is present. The items in question are
buried in the piles of junk and thus take days to locate. The dark creepers
have burrows in the piles of junk, and can find the item in question in
mere moments if they have a mind to. The dark stalker dwells in a tent
made of cast off cloaks over a wire frame atop the tallest pile in the yard.

Credit: The Dark Stalker originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Simon
Muth.

Darnoc
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Slam (1d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Curse of the grave, symbol of discord, ghostly
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

The darnoc is a corrupting evil presence whose very touch sucks the life
from an opponent bit by painful bit. The darnoc are said to be the restless
spirits of oppressive, cruel, and power hungry individuals cursed forever
to a life of monotony and toil, forbidden by the gods to taste the spoils of
the afterlife they so desperately craved in life. Often seen in the clothes
and guise it wore in life, a darnoc often walks the same halls and repeats
the same actions of its insipid existence over and over again.
Due to their great greed, a darnoc may be found within its treasury
endlessly counting its coins, or within a graveyard noting the headstones
of its vanquished foes with cruel mirth. When distracted from its reverie
of its remembered past life, the creature flies into an inconsolable rage,
often lashing out without warning or provocation at the first individual
who attempts to speak to it. Creatures within a 30-foot radius and with
less HD than the darnoc become flee in dear for 2d6 rounds when it flies
into a rage if they fail a saving throw.
Once per day, a darnoc can scribe a symbol in the air. All creatures with
an Intelligence score of 3 or higher within 60 feet who see the symbol
must succeed on a saving throw or immediately fall into loud bickering
and arguing. Meaningful communication is impossible. If the affected
creatures have different alignments, there is a 50% chance that they attack
each other. Bickering lasts 3d6 rounds. Fighting begins 1d6 rounds into
the bickering and lasts 2d6 rounds. Once triggered, the symbol lasts 2
hours. Any damage dealt by a darnoc's slam attack does not heal naturally
and resists all magical healing (potions, cure spells, and so on). Before
the damage can be healed, the curse must first be broken with a break
enchantment or remove curse spell (requiring a DC 20 caster level check
for either spell).
A darnoc can become incorporeal for up to 10 minutes each day. While
incorporeal, the darnoc can only be harmed by magic weapons and spells.
Any humanoid slain by a darnoc becomes a darnoc in 1d4 rounds. Spawn
are under the command of the darnoc that created them and remain
enslaved until its destruction.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Insipid Greed
The ruler of the walled city-state was beside himself with worry. How
was he to know that killing his exchequer would result in such calamity after all, he had probably killed about one minister a month since he took
the throne as a young man. Always the exchequer stood by, giving wise
council and finding ways to fund the king's schemes.
But at the thought of giving the king his youngest daughter before her
wedding day the minister balked, and for that he had to be killed. Death,
however, did not part the exchequer from his post, for the next day his
replacement fled in panic at the sight of the old man sitting in the treasury
counting the coins.
Now, the wicked little king needs his money, and thus a team of
adventurers capable of ridding the treasury of the minister's spirit. The
king promises anything to get the deed done, but will certainly betray his
saviors when they have completed their mission.

Death Dog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 bites (1d6 plus rotting death)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Rotting death
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Death dogs are two-headed, mastiff-like hounds; nocturnal killing
machines that hunt their prey without hesitation across the desert sands
and wastelands. Death dog packs have been known to share territory with
little friction, although they do engage in dominance battles in leaner
times when hunting is difficult. Victims of the death dog's bite must pass
a saving throw or come down with the rotting death, losing 1d6 points of
constitution each day until they succeed at a saving throw at a -5 penalty.
Victims who lose all their points of constitution die. Constitution can be
restored with powerful healing magic or be complete bed rest, with one
point of constitution returning with each week of rest.

Credit: The Death Dog originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by
Underworld Oracle.

Killer Packs
While crossing the amber sands of the great desert you come across
a lonely tower of sandstone that almost blends into the landscape. The
tower shows some weathering, and appears to be quite ancient. The
picked over bones of a horse lies half-buried in the sands near the tower.
A sturdy iron door, scalding to the touch, blocks entry, and the tower has
no windows, though a trap door allows access through the roof. The walls
of the tower are five feet thick, and the circular rooms within measure 8
feet in diameter.
The ground floor is empty save for an old, dry straw mattress, some
broken crockery and a longbow, the string snapped. The third floor is
likewise empty, save for a dusty skull and a few empty wine bottles. The
second floor, however, is inhabited by a maiden, beautiful but flushed
and desperate, and her love, a young knight of the desert sands, his face
haggard, his robes torn and a terrible wound on his right leg. The wound
has been bound, but needs proper cleaning, for it looks septic. The knight
is not long for the world, having perhaps two or three days before he dies
unless given some powerful magical healing.
The maiden will explain that they were fleeing across the desert from
her wicked uncle when they were attacked by a pack of 1d3+1 black,
two-headed hounds. The knight was wounded by one of the dogs and they
were fortunate to outrun them and find this tower. They’ve been trapped
here for three days now, the dogs surrounding the tower each night and
the knight too ill to walk, the horse having died from exhaution after their
race across the desert.

Death Worm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (1d8 plus 1d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Spit lightning, surprise on 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 9/6 (burrowing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Death worms are long, slender, reddish-brown monsters related to the
purple worm. Its skin is mottled yellow across its back, tapering off as the
colors near its head. Its mouth is huge and lined with rock hard teeth that
allow it to break rocks and earth as it burrows underground. The death
worm is a reclusive, desert-dwelling creature content to spend its life
burrowing beneath the ground and sustaining itself on a diet of sand and
earth. On occasion, it surfaces to devour more substantial prey (animals
such as saiga, deer, yaks and humans). Death worms lay their eggs far
beneath the surface of the earth. A death worm lurks under sand or loose
earth, waiting for its prey to move close where it then ambushes its target,
surprising on a 1-3 on 1d6. A death worm's mouth constantly drips highly
corrosive saliva. Once every 1d4 rounds a death worm can spit a 3 dice
lightning bolt (saving throw for half damage).

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley.

Opportunists
The guide you hired in the last village has been leading you over the
rolling country of the steppe for several days when he finally stops
cold and points to a distant outcropping of reddish-brown stones. The
outcropping form a sort of natural gate to a lowland beyond. He will
inform you that this is the entrance to the holy land of the great khan,
the land of his birth and taboo for any to enter. He will go no further, but
will explain that the place you seek (whatever goal is currently being
sought by the players in your game) is beyond that land on the edge of a
woodland of scrawny pines. The journey across the lowland should take
approximately one week. At this he turns and heads away.
The lowland is sandy and barren, with strange stones, like monuments
of chalk, breaking the endless sea of sand every few miles. The sands
of the lowland are bronze colored, with strange streaks of darker, more
reddish sand crisscrossing the landscape. The guide has, unfortunately,
lied to you about this being holy land, for it is really the hunting ground
of a death worm. The guide and his friends, who trailed about two days
behind your band, plan to strike you when you flee the lowlands, bloodied
and bruised by the worm, a few of your number maybe left to feed it.
In all, the guide has 1d10+10 friends, bandits mounted on swift, light
horses and wearing leather armor and carrying a short, jagged spear and
a longbow with 25 arrows.

Decapus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  9 tentacles (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Strangle, illusion
Move: 6/12 (climbing and swinging)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A decapus is a large (4-foot in diameter), pale green spheroid with ten
octopus-like tentacles protruding from its body. Hair grows in broken
patches along its body. Its eyes are stark white and pupiless. Its large
mouth sports long, yellow fangs. Decapuses are solitary creatures that
dwell in dense forests or underground. Most prefer the forests as their
ability to move among the trees allows them to either pursue their prey
or flee in situations not to their advantage. On the ground, decapuses are
slow-moving, thus they spend most of their time among the tree tops.
Decapuses are nocturnal hunters and are quite fond of human, elf, and
halfling flesh. In times when food is scarce, they exist on a diet of rats,
snakes, and other small forest creatures (or dungeon denizens in the case
of the subterranean decapus). Decapuses seem to be able to speak with
others of their kind using a series of guttural noises.
Decapuses attack with their tentacles. A decapus that beats its opponent's
Armor Class by 6 or more latches around their neck and scores automatic
damage each round thereafter until it is killed (and 1d4 rounds even after
it is killed) or its victim makes a successful open doors check. At will, a
decapus can create an effect identical to the phantasmal force spell. The
creature can also mimic any creature it has previously encountered with
near total accuracy, though it cannot mimic humanoid speech longer than
two or three words at a time.

Credit: The Decapus originally appeared in the First Edition module B3 Palace
of the Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jean
Wells.

Difficult Terrain
Regardless of the direction from which you enter this woodland of
towering oaks, the ground slopes downward. The entire area is like a
miles-wide funnel, eventually sinking into a series of flooded caverns
featuring coursing rivers and waterfalls. Three swift streams run through
the woodland and into the cave system. In many places in the woodland
one will see the granite ledges that compose the landscape's foundation.
One might also (1 in 10 chance, 1 in 6 for elves and rangers) notice
broken limbs littering the ground, as though something heavy has moved
through the trees, swinging from limb to limb. The funnel woods is home
to a solitary decapus. The decapus keeps a lair of woven branches in a
particularly tall tree that hangs over the open gulf that leads into the cavern
system. A rushing waterfall runs past the tree. Any fight that occurs in the
tree will be particularly dangerous, as a wrong move (missing an attack
by more than 3 points or suffering maximum damage from a blow) might
knock one into the vortex of water (saving throw to negate), a fall that
will cause 10d6 points of damage and might very well end in drowning.
The decapus keeps a modest treasure of 1d6 x 200 sp, 1d4 x 100gp in a
terracotta coffer (worth 50 gp) in its lair.

Demi-Lich
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: Steal soul
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Immune to most spells, +3 or better magic weapon
to hit, immune to acid, electricity, fire, cold and polymorph,
rejuvenation, steal souls
Move: 12 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A demilich is a skull with gems in place of its eyes and teeth. Demiliches
cannot be turned, and can cast cast death spells at will. Up to 8 times a
day, a demilich can steal the soul of any creature within 30 feet unless
the victim makes a save. After 24 hours, the demilich devours the soul,
permanently slaying the creature. Power word kill and dispel evil spells
deal 50 points of damage (no save) to a demilich. Demiliches are immune
to all other spells. Unless its remains are consecrated, a demilich reforms
in 1d10 days.

Credit: The Demi-Lich originally appeared in the First Edition module S1 Tomb
of Horrors (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1978) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Tooth and Nail
This 75-foot-diameter room has but one entrance. The domed ceiling reaches 75
feet high at its peak, where a mural of an eclipsed sun looms.  A crimson aura
of light faintly glows from the mural and bathes the room in nightmarish
light. The walls and half-sphere ceiling are covered in 6-inch-long rusted
spikes set into the stone. A bier sits in the center of the room, draped with
a sheer white burial shroud. A skull topped staff can be seen through the
lattice shroud. The staff appears to be gem encrusted with platinum bands
binding the shaft.

This is the burial vault of Akilha Harn, a little-known wizard from ancient
times. In her day, she ruled a small kingdom with fear and cruelty.  In her
quest for immortality, she turned to lichdom. As an undead, she had her skull
removed and replaced with one of copper (its location and terrible powers have
yet to be discovered). She then created a staff of incredible power and topped
it with her own skull. She ultimately evolved into the demilich that was
placed in this vault. The skull is fastened to the magical staff, but can
still attack normally anyone in the room.

The tomb is guarded by two aerial servants that are more of a distraction to
the real danger that lurks within the room. A secret door on the side of the
bier holds Akilha Harn's mostly disintegrated remains. Her moldering robes and
funeral veil lie in tatters. Jewelry (both magical and regal) and other
nonperishable items are entombed as well. The concealed treasure should be
great to PCs matching wits with Akilha Harn's deadly legacy and utter
iniquity. Destroying the demilich shatters the magical staff forever.

Demiurge
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Incorporeal touch (1d4)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Chill, soul touch, transfixing gaze, incorporeal, only
harmed by cold-wrought iron or spells, magic resistance
(50%)
Move: 12/15 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2600

The demiurge is the undead spirit of an evil human returned from the grave
with a wrathful vengeance against all living creatures that enter its domain.
The demiurge is very territorial, usually haunting an area of up to three
square miles from its place of death. It appears as a humanoid with sunken
nose, hollow eye sockets, and sickly pale white, semi-transparent flesh. Its
hair is unkempt and dirty, and its clothes are nothing more than rags that
hang loosely from its translucent form. Any creature within 30 feet meeting
the demiurge's gaze must succeed on a saving throw or be transfixed for one
turn as if affected by a hold person spell. The touch of the demiurge brings
the cold of the grave and deals 1d4 points of damage to a living creature
touched. A creature that is moved through by a demiurge must pass a saving
throw or die from shock. Animals can sense the unnatural presence of
a demiurge at a distance of 30 feet. They will not willingly approach nearer
than that and panic if forced to do so; they remain panicked as long as they
are within that range.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Scorched Vengeance
While you were informed that the land beyond the mountain pass contained
a fertile high meadow of dainty dun dairy cows and happy, though mildly
xenophobic mountain herders, the land you see appears wild and uninhabited.
You might come across a small herd of cattle, now half-wild and grazing, an
alert bull challenging any who approach. About two miles into the meadowlands
you discover a village surrounded by a low wall of field stone and consisting
of a few dozen stone hovels and a ramshackle kirk with a blue door of oak and
a large brass knocker in the shape of Jack o’ the Green. Twenty or so bodies
lie decomposing in the village, their faces twisted into masks of sheer
horror, their flesh marbled and putrefaction setting in.

Most of the villagers have fled into the surrounding hills, most of them
succumbing to the cold or packs of wolves. The source of their destruction was
the burning of a foreign woman in front of the church - the charred post and
bones and a pile of ashes still in evidence. The villagers believed her
a witch, come to spread a pox among their cattle. Moments after the poor woman
died, the grim villagers witnessed in horror her spectral image stepping out
of the holocaust. Now a demiurge, she spread death and panic in her quest to
revenge herself on the wicked peasants, blocking their attempts to flee into
the mountain pass and sending most of them into the hills without food or
adequate clothing. So enraged is this demiurge that she will attack any who
enter the valley, provided they are within 3 miles of the charred post where
she met her end.

The village's only treasure, besides two golden candlesticks in the kirk worth
about 50 gp, are its cattle. About fifty of the creatures yet live and wander
the valley.

Demodand, Shaggy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8) and bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spells, +1 or better weapon to hit, magic resistance
(75%), immunity to acid and poison, immune to mental
effects
Move: 15/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 22/5000

The mighty shaggy demodands are the ruling class of the demodand
race. No greater demodands are known to exist, though rumors lately hint
at a single, powerful demodand of near-deity status. Shaggy demodands
are by far the most malign, selfish, evil, and ruthless of the tripartite race
of demodands. They are the nobility and upper class of demodand society
and commanders of the demodand armies. A typical shaggy demodand
stands 6 feet tall and weighs about 550 pounds. They resemble bipedal
frog-like creatures with crimson skin. Shaggy demodands are bloated
and their skin hangs in great folds about its body. Large, bat-like wings
protrude from the creature's shoulders. Shaggy demodands can cast the
following spells: Charm monster (1/day), cloudkill (3/day), dispel magic
(1/day), ESP, gaseous form, invisibility (self), and obscuring mist (3/day).

Credit: The Shaggy Demodand originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Damn-sel in Distress
Atop the pinnacle of a citadel of cyclopean blocks of basalt on a
basalt plain surrounded by plumes of acidic flame there sits the gloating
conqueror, a massive shaggy demodand. The bloated fiend is surrounded
by the spoils of its conquest - the bones of one thousand minor demons,
licked clean of meat and sucked empty of marrow. Creeping about the
citadel are 1d2 slime demodands and 1d4+1 tarry demodands, searching
out the citadel for bits of treasure and hiding survivors of the assault.
Deep in the bowels (literally - the Netherworld is a frightening,
confusing place) of the citadel, if one can dodge the slimes and otyughs,
they might discover the princess of the citadel, an alu-demon, cradling
her child and wearing the great treasure of the citadel, a crystalline
gauntlet that can project hands of force and block magic missiles. She
cannot escape the citadel without help, and might be willing to join forces
with any adventurers treasure-hungry enough to have made it past the
patrolling demodands.

Demodand, Slime
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 13
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8 plus 1d6 acid) and bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Enslime, spells, +1 or better weapon to hit, immunity
to acid and poison, immune to mental effects, magic
resistance (60%)
Move: 15/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 22/5000

Slime demodnads are 6 to 7-foot tall, bloated, slimy, black humanoids
with large bat-like wings protruding from their shoulders. Its skin
constantly drips and oozes a thick white-gray mucus. It has thick
elephantine legs and long, powerful arms that end in razor-sharp talons.
Slime demodands delight in torturing creatures of lesser skill and rank
than themselves. The slimy secretions of the slime demodand are highly
acidic, thus any contact with its skin causes 1d6 points of damage.
Creatures hit by all three of the demodand's attacks in a round are covered
in the acidic slime and suffer 1d6 points of damage per round until they
are doused in either sand or alcohol. Wine cuts the damage in half and
water has no effect. Slime demodands exude a stench to a range of 30
feet. Any living creature in the area must succeed on a saving throw or
become sickened, suffering a -2 penalty to hit and save each round they
are in the area and 2d6 rounds after leaving the area. Slime demodands
can cast the following spells: Cause fear, dispel magic (1/day), ESP,
gaseous form, invisibility (self) and obscuring mist.

Credit: The Slime Demodand originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

The Lake of Slime
Amidst a shallow lake of gray slime there is a rocky island, and atop that
island a twisted tower of barbed wrought iron. The tower has no entrance
other than a circular stone portal in the base. A total strength of 50 is
required to pivot the stone. Once inside the tower, one finds themselves at
the bottom of a long, winding shaft studded with rusty spikes that can be
used to climb. The shaft is 100 feet long and ends in a small observation
chamber clad in cloudy crimson glass, warm to the touch.
Hanging from the ceiling by a brazen chain is a sword of damascus steel,
black of blade and engraved with profane images. The longsword is a +2
weapon and, when swung, cries out in a terrible shriek that causes fear in
creatures with 3 HD or less. Tendrils of malevolent force will burrow into
the flesh of the wielder of the sword, clogging their minds with paranoia
and hatred and turning them deeply and irrevocably evil if they do not
pass a saving throw once a week to retain control of themselves. The
slimy lake, 1 mile in diameter, is the hunting ground of 1d4+1 slime
demodands, the lax guardians of the evil sword.

Demodand, Tarry
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8), bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Adhesive, spells, +1 or better weapon to hit,
immune to acid and poison, immune to mental effects,
magic resistance (50%)
Move: 15/21 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 18/3800

Tarry demodands are tall gray-skinned humanoids with green eyes and
a long, oval heads. Two large, dull gray bat-like wings sprout from its
shoulders. Its hands end in blackened claws. Cruel, malevolent creatures,
they wander the planes of Tarterus as soldiers and warriors in the mighty
demodand armies. Tarry demodands care little for anything and attack and
kill just about anything weaker than themselves. When they take damage,
they have a 50% chance of flying into a rage, gaining +2 bonus to hit and
damage and suffering a -2 penalty to Armor Class. A tarry demodand
exudes a thick tar-like substance that acts as a powerful adhesive, holding
fast any creatures or items touching it. Removing a stuck item or body
part requires an open door check. Because of their adhesive skin, tarry
demodands enjoy a +2 bonus to grapple and pin opponents in combat.
Strong alcohol dissolves the adhesive. A pint of wine or a similar liquid
weakens it, but the tarry demodand can still grapple normally. A tarry
demodand can dissolve its adhesive at will, and the substance breaks
down 1 minute after the creature dies. Tarry demodands can cast the
following spells: cause fear, dispel magic (1/day), ESP, gaseous form
and invisibility (self).

Credit: The Tarry Demodand originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Tar and Fungus
From beyond this small box canyon in a landscape of white bluffs
shaped like supplicating demons and giant puffball fungi (ascomoids)
that blow across the landscape like tumbleweeds one can hear the clash
of arms, as two mighty armies of the Underworld go through one of the
many pointless bloodlettings so common to these dimensions.
A troupe of 1d4+1 tarry demodands has fled from this battle and now
hides in this canyon hoping to evade detection by the hell hounds of their
master. The bizarre creatures now sit in the shade of one of the mighty
bluffs (one can just make out a whimper coming from the stone), rolling
the knuckle bones of a saintly man in some form of game and betting
chips carved from the horns of devils. Although they had no desire to
throw themselves into yet another battle for their master, the chaotic
fiends are more than happy to attack a band of meddling adventures.
At the first sign of company, they vanish from view and make their way
into a position of ambush.

Demon, Aeshma (Rage Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  Weapon (2d6+1) or 2 claws (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Rage, spells, wounding spear, +1 or better weapon
to hit, immune to electricity, see invisibility, magic resistance
(45%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15/21 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 19/4100

Aeshma are demons of rage. They creature are 8-foot tall humanoids
with basalt-colored skin. Dark hair covers its head and its hair is long and
braided. Its arms are well-muscled and its hands end in powerful claws.
Its head is human-like and its eyes are sapphire blue. Large leathery,
bat-like wings protrude from its shoulders. Aeshma, sometimes called
“fiends of the wounding spear”, sometimes command battalions of lesser
demons, usually vrocks or dretches. An aeshma that is reduced to half
it normal hp in combat flies into a berserk rage on its next turn,
swinging madly with its longspear. A raging aeshma fights until either it
or its opponent is dead and gains an additional attack each round. Aeshma
continuously see invisibility. They can cast a web spell twice per day.
Aeshma carry long +1 spears that cause terrible wounds when they hit.
Creatures wounded by these spears suffer 1d2 points of damage each
round after they are wounded from blood loss until the wounds are bound
or magically healed.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

A Whiter Shade of Rage
The strange palace of blue glass rising from the fetid swamplands of
the Underworld seems an uncharacteristic island of calm in an otherwise
abyssmal land of pain and torment. The palace measures 500 feet to a side
and featured hundreds of slim towers, each ending in a perfect sphere.
Weird, worm-like shapes can be seen wriggling inside the spheres to an
unknown purpose. Four gates has the blue palace, each possessing a gate
made of wrought iron, but each open to entry.
Inside the palace there are a myriad of passages, stairs up and down and
domed chambers furnished with angular chairs and tables of white wood.
As one approaches the center of the palace, they discern a strange droning
coming from the walls, as though somebody is running a wet finger along
the rim of a crystal goblet. The very center of the palace is a circular
tower, the tallest of the palace.
The tower stands 300 feet tall and is open from floor to ceiling. In the
center of the tower, floating three feet above the floor, there is a sphere
of azure glass pulsing with brilliant white light. As a group studies the
sphere, they might not notice the exits from the tower slowly closing,
filling with glass until, when completely blocked, one would never know
there were exits at all.
Once the exits are closed, the glass walls of the tower will begin to
swirl, becoming blue-violet and then red-violet, and finally casting a light
the color of freshly spilled blood. The droning becomes louder and more
insistent, reaching into one's psyche and drawing out their ire and rage
until all present must pass a saving throw each round to avoid attacking
their allies.
The droning can be stopped by smashing the globe, releasing an
aeshma, the genius loci of the palace. Once released, the aeshma attacks
any present. The death of the demon is the only way to re-open the exits
from the central tower. After the demon's death, the palace is filled with
thousands of ghosts, the souls of those claimed by rage and violence.
The ghosts ignore the adventurers unless attacked, though they might
accidentally drift through them while wandering the halls.

Demon, Alu-Demon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Sword (1d8) or 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Spells, vampiric touch, immune to poison, magic
resistance (15%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

The alu-demon is the female demonic offspring of a succubus and human.
Though part demon, not all alu-demons are inherently chaotic (although
lawful alu-demons are extremely rare). The typical alu-demon has black
or brown hair and dark green, brown, or black eyes. Alu-demons might be
sent to the Material Plane to seduce mortals. When on such missions they
typically arrange their flowing hair so it hides their horns and also fold
their wings against their backs (and tuck them under their robe, shirt, or
whatever garment of clothing one happens to be wearing at the time). Each
time an alu-demon hits with its claw attack it gains temporary hp
equal to the damage she inflicts. These temporary hp disappear in
one hour. Alu-demons can cast the following spells: Charm person (3/day),
dimension door (1/day), ESP (3/day) and suggestion (1/day).

Credit: The Alu-Demon originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Thar She Blows!
Across the storm-tossed seas of the Abyss there roams a sleek whaler,
the Broken Vow, a stately ship of bone and laquered wood with three
masts and a crew of 20 lost souls (zombies, but more mobile than usual
and possessed of a malevolent intelligence).

The captain of the Broken Vow is a swaggering, foul-mouthed alu-demon who
wears slops of black velvet, a vest of purple satin and veritable horde of
ivory and gold jewelry (worth 500 gp).  The alu-demon carries a curved sword
and dagger, and can be seen pacing the decks, barking orders and periodically
peering into the grey swirl that passes for an atmosphere above the ebony
waves flecked with crimson foam.

The Broken Vow and its captain hunt abyssal whales with jagged harpoons fired
from swivel guns.  They are currently on the hunt for the whale that took the
captain's last ship and crew.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Demon, Balban (Brute Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 fists (1d6), 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Magic resistance (15%), pound, trample
Move: 14
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

4/3/3/2/1; Spells: 1—Charm Person, Magic Missile (x2),
Shield; 2—Invisibility, Levitate, Web; 3—Fireball, Invisibility (10foot Radius), Protection from Normal Missiles; 4—Confusion,
Ice Strom; 5—Cloudkill

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

A balban demon resembles a 12-foot-tall bipedal elephant. Balbans attack
with its two fists. If it hits a single opponent with both fists, it pounds the
victim into the ground for an additional 2d6 points of damage. Balbans can
charge and trample creatures for 2d8 points of damage (save avoids).

The Legless Wizard
The wizard Bidbleez suffered a horrific injury from an encounter with a
wrath dragon that left him permanently scarred. His legs end at the knees
and deep burn scars cover his flesh. Bidbleez, not one to let a mere flesh
wound hamper him, arrived at a demented solution. Through his dark
arts, he made a pact with a balban to allow the demon to serve as his
legs. He rides the balban on a special chair attached to the balban's four
horns and broad, flat head. The chair is bolted to the horns and Bidbleez
is strapped securely into the chair. Together, these two roam and savage
the lands in search of a treatment that will restore Bidbleez to health and
fulfill the pact he made with the balban.
BIDBLEEZ: HD 9 (magic-user); HP 21; AC 9[10]; Atk 1 dagger
(1d4); Move 12; Save 7; CL/XP 9/1,100; Special: Spells.

Demon, Cambion
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Weapon or 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Spells, +1 or better weapon to hit, immune to
electricity and poison, magic resistance (20%), telepathy
100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

When an incubus mates with a human female, the offspring is a
cambion. Cambions, unlike their “sisters” the alu-demons, are always
chaotic and care little for anyone or anything but their own well-being.
They are selfish, self-centered, and egotistical. Cambions hate humans
and are often employed as assassins. Cambions are always male. The
typical cambion stands 6 or 7 feet tall and weighs 200 pounds or more.
It is stocky in build and has scaly skin of various colors, with blue being
the most common, small fangs, tiny horns and crimson eyes. Cambions
usually speak the common tongue of men, the secret language of demons
and at least one other language. Cambions can cast cause fear, ESP,
levitate and polymorph self at will.

Credit: The Cambion originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Consorts of Demons
The old witch hill outside the village is best avoided - any attempt at
gathering rumors in the village public house will garner that piece of
advice. The ground on the hill is gray and spongy, with cruel, spiked
stones forming a chaotic shrine (or so the locals say). The space inside
those stones does show signs of fires burning there, and some digging will
produce bones that might have come from animals or humanoids. The
locals say that a coven of witches used to meet at that spot and conduct
terrible revels under the dark of the new moon, conjuring spirits that
would knock on doors at night and then flee or curdle the cow's milk.
The hill measures about 500 feet in diameter and rises about 35 feet at
its highest point. Twelve runic stones have been erected around the base
of the hill by local priests to hem in the malevolent influence of the site
and, if not make it holy, at least make it useless to the unholy. On the
far side of the hill there is a small cave that leads into the lair of an aged
man with blue-gray hair. The old man is a hermit, a cambion demon born
on the hill during one of the revels and now unable to leave it due to the
presence of the holy stones.
Inside his humble lair he has a simple straw pallet, a gallery of skulls adventurers who decided to investigate the odd rumors they had heard in
the village - and wooden chest covered in the skin of those adventurers
and branded with profane symbols. Inside this chest he keeps his treasure
and a book of mystic investigations he has made in trying to break the
influence of the holy stones. This book can be used by magic-users trying
to develop spells to overcome magic or summon demons, giving them a
bonus on rolls made to develop their spells.

Demon, Chaaor (Beast Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 1 [19]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d8+3) and bite (2d6+3)
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Rend, roar, magical abilities, summon demons, +1
weapons to hit, immune to electricity and poison, resists
cold, fire and acid
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

A chaaor is a 12-foot-tall, hulking, ape-like brute with the head of a
bear. Large downward curving, grayish-silver horns grow from its head
and end in rounded points. A chaaor's body is covered in reddish-black
fur and is almost always caked or matted in blood. The powerful arms of a
chaaor end in razor-sharp and filthy black claws. Long rows of sharpened
teeth fill the chaaor's mouth. When moving, the chaaor usually drops
to all fours. When facing an aggressor it assumes a bipedal stance. If a
chaaor hits with both claw attacks, it tears the flesh of its opponent for
an automatic 2d8 points of damage. Three times per day, a chaaor can
let loose a deadly roar that does 3d6 points of damage to all creatures
within 60 feet (save for half). At will a chaaor can create darkness (15
foot radius) and teleport. Chaaor are immune to electricity and poison,
and take half damage from cold, fire and acid.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Does a Bear Wreak Havoc
In the Woods?
Dunslap Hollow's main commodity is swine. The entire town has
developed into a massive swine farm where the overpopulated livestock
run freely through the streets. Having only a population around hundred
and fewer than 20 permanent structures, the few paths through town are
quagmires of mud and feces. High councilman Hamish Talley runs the
stockyard and the local tavern. The indentured townsfolk work for him
and are paid in rent, sparse rations and cheap booze. Talley instantly
dislikes anyone who questions how he runs his town, and his “boys” take
care of people who raise too much of a fuss.
Hamish and his cronies recently ran a druid named Farlardo out of town.
Farlardo arrived spouting off about the inhumane treatment of the swine
in town and the damage to the environment from their waste. Hamish told
his men the druid was right and ordered them to clean the streets … by
pulling the haughty druid through the muck. They left the filth-covered
druid on the outskirts of town and told him to never come back.
Since then, town workers and swine alike have disappeared nightly
leaving only gore as a clue to their fate. The embarrassed
Farlardo made a pact with a Chaaor demon to get even
with the town, and the demonic bear is reveling in the
torment it is causing. It allows people to enter Dunslap
Hollow, but brutally attacks those who attempt to
leave.

Demon, Choronzon (Chaos Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Confusion, magic resistance (55%), +2 or better
magic weapon required to hit, immune to electricity and
fire, decomposing breath
Move: 14
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

A choronzon is a 20-foot-tall behemoth weighing 9,000 pounds with
a muscular demonic body. It has bluish-black scaly flesh and horns and
claws. Choronzons radiate confusion (as per the spell of the same name)
within 20 feet and its decomposing breath deals 8d6 points of damage in
a 50-foot diameter (save for half damage). The massive demon can cause
darkness in a 20-foot radius and resists magic.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

When Looking Into the Abyss . . .
A large, ruined wall stands defiantly amid the spacious and partially
collapsed room. A 15-foot-tall mirror remains imbedded into the far wall.
It has miraculously survived unscathed. A nondescript wooden border
encircles its oval shape. Its creators branded a prophecy into the frame in
old and ornate script:
Envisage eras of arid seas and lands afire,
Whilst Legion devours souls impious and vain.
Look within the mirror, state your desire,
For the meek shall inherit and the faithful reign.

The mirror grants the first two wishes to those standing before it.
Although the mirror is not inherently evil, the wishes appear to become
reality. With time, however, the wishes distort and curse the individual.
With a third wish, the reflective surface of the mirror becomes a wall of
fire and a choronzon steps through the portal. The mirror's origin, purpose
and powers lie with the Game Referee, as do the exact results and bane
of the granted wishes.


CORRUPTOR DEMONS

Demons of corruption (also called corruptor demons) are used by the various greater demons (including the lords and
princes) to destroy all that is good and just by seducing agents of good and law. Many spellcasters have fallen victim to
the temptations and lies these demons spread. Those that fall from the side of good find themselves spiraling down into
a sea of madness and despair from which they rarely return.

The demon lords and princes made it easy for even the weakest spellcaster (one
not able to summon and control demons because of insufficient knowledge or
understanding of the required spells) to summon a demon of corruption; if the
demon can corrupt a lawful creature early in its career, the demon lord or
prince can take that creature under its wing and mold it into a powerful tool
of chaos.

When summoned, a demon of corruption automatically establishes a mental link
between itself and the one who summoned it (the host).  Distance is not
a factor to maintain the link, and it can span across planes and dimensions.
The demon need not concentrate to maintain the link. A corruptor demon can
have in existence at one time a number of links equal to its Hit Dice.
A corruptor demon can break a link it has established any time it likes.

The link allows the demon to speak (as if by telepathy) to the host and submit
subconscious thoughts and messages to him or her. Once per task requested of
the corruptor demon (or once per week if no task is requested), as long as the
link is in existence, the host must succeed on a saving throw or have his
alignment shift one increment toward Chaos.

When the host's alignment completely shifts to Chaos (or if the host is
chaotic when the link is first established), he must immediately succeed on
a saving throw or go permanently insane. A successful save negates the
insanity for one month, after which time a new save must be made again.  This
cycle continues until the host fails a save and goes insane or until the link
between host and corruptor demon is broken. The link is blocked by lead and
magical circles and can be dispelled through magical means.

The alignment shift caused by these demons can only be removed after the link
is broken. This requires the host to voluntarily subject himself to a ritual
performed by a cleric (or druid) of at least 9th level of the alignment the
subject originally possessed. The subject of the ritual might also have to
atone through some specific act.

Call Lesser Demon
Conjuration (Calling)
Spell Level: Cleric and Magic-User, 3rd level
Range: 30 feet
Duration: Instantaneous

By casting this spell, you summon a lesser demon of 5 HD or less.
You do not need to have the same alignment as the demon summoned.
This spell was specifically created by a powerful demon prince (some
say Orcus) and allowed to pass into the hands of mortal spellcasters to
summon corruptor demons so they might corrupt the caster and turn
him chaotic. Lawful creatures can freely employ this spell if desired.
The target creature receives a saving throw to avoid the calling. If
the save fails, the creature is immediately drawn to your location. A
demon subjected to this spell receives a penalty on its saving throw
or magic resistance roll based on the alignment of the caster. Demons
suffer a -2 or 10% penalty if summoned by a neutral spell caster and
a -4 or 20% penalty if the spell caster is lawful.

You may ask the demon to perform one task for you, and the demon
may ask for some service in return (note that corruptor demons never
request anything in return, desiring only to use their whisper of madness
against the caster). The more demanding the task, the greater the return
favor asked for by the summoned demon. This bargaining takes at least
1 round, so any actions by the demon begin in the round after it arrives.
If the character agrees to the service, the demon performs the task the
character requested, reports back to the character afterward (if possible),
and returns to its home plane. The character is honor bound to perform
the return favor. If the return favor is not completed as promised, the
summoner is visited by an appropriate number of demons that attempt
to slay him and take his soul.

Who's Tempting Whom?
Exploring the underworld, you come across a tall, octagonal chamber
with a vaulted ceiling clad in prophyry. In the center of the room there
is a large scrying pool surrounded by three demons, a barizou, azizou
and geruzou. The demons are watching a sorcerous NPC known to the
adventurers (but not an ally) as he thumbs through a book of demonology.
The demons are not yet tempting the man, as he has not yet decided to
call one of them. Although the adventurers may think they have arrived
in time to stop the demons, they are in fact being lured into a trap of
temptation themselves.

The NPC magic-user is of little interest to the demons, who are
themselves intended to be sacrificed to the swords of the PCs. In fact,
the PCs are being tempted into using their knowledge of the NPC against
him. Whether the scrying pool is showing a true scene or not is up to the
Referee, but it is a certainty that a different scrying pool in the Abyss is
showing the activities of the PCs for the entertainment of a major demon.

Demon, Corruptor Azizou (Pain Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack: 2 claws (1d4), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Spells, whisper of madness, rending claws,
+1 or better weapon to hit, immunity to electricity and
poison,  magic resistance (10%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 7/600

The azizou is slightly larger than the barizou and is quite strong for its
size. They are relentless combatants and love to inflict pain and suffering
on their opponents in combat. Azizoiu have jackal heads, grayish skin
covered in patches of course, black hair and large, round eyes with slitpupils of gray. Membranous wings protrude from their backs and their
hands and feet end in talons. A combatant who suffers damage from both
of an azizou's claw attacks in the same round suffers an additional 1d6
damage as its flesh is rended. Azizous can cast cause fear, ESP, invisibility
(self) and stinking cloud.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson.

Demon, Corruptor Barizou (Assassin Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Spells, whisper of madness, chamelon,
backstab, +1 or better weapon to hit, immunity to electricity
and poison, magic resistance (5%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 6/400

Called assassin demons or infiltrator demons, the barizou are employed
as such because their small size allows them to move unseen in many
places larger demons cannot go. They look like gray-skinned halflings
with the heads of wolves, membranous wings and talons on their hands
and feet. A barizou's mouth is filled with razor-sharp fangs and its back
is mottled with sickly patches of bluish-gray. Barizou can cast cause fear
and invisibility (self) at will. Barizou can alter their coloration to blend
with their suroundings, allowing them to surprise on a roll of 1-4 on
1d6. When a barizou attacks a surprised opponent, they can backstab for
double damage (as a thief).

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson.

Demon, Corruptor Geruzou (Slime Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Spells, whisper of madness, spit slime, +1 or better weapon to hit, immunity to electricity and poison, magic resistance (15%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 8/800

Geruzou are sometimes called slime demons because their sickly-gray,
leathery skin constantly drips and oozes thick, jelly-like mucus. Like their
brethren, they are fierce combatants and are often employed as hunters
and trackers by greater demons. The typical geruzou stands nearly 4
feet tall and has a horse-like head with downward-curving horns. It has
long, sharp teeth exploding from its mouth, stretching its lips back in a
perpetual snarl, and taloned hands and feet. A pair of large, membranous
wings jut from its back. Three times per day, a geruzou can spit a stream
of slimy goo in a 20-foot line. This spit attack requires a ranged attack
against an AC of 10 plus its target's Dexterity bonus to AC (if any). A
creature hit by the slime is coated and slowed (as the slow spell) for 6
rounds if it fails a saving throw. A geruzou can cast cause fear, darkness,
ESP, invisibility (self) and mirror image.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson.

Demon, Daraka (Swarm Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  2 claws (1d10), bite (2d6) or scorpions (1d6 plus
poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Scorpions, spells, magic or silver weapons to hit,
immunity to electricity and poison, magic resistance (50%),
telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 19/4100

Darakas are 9-foot tall, black-skinned humanoids with the heads of
rams. A daraka's skin is leathery and oily and from a distance of 10 feet
or more appears to be a mass of writhing flesh. Closer inspection reveals
thousands of tiny scorpions swarming its flesh, skittering in and out of
its mouth, ears and nose, seemingly unnoticed by the demon. They act
as guards to the greater demons or as shock troops in demonic armies.
Quite intelligent, they are often used as commanders or leaders, with each
daraka having a battalion of minor demons at its command. Darakas can
make themselves invisible at will and can cast the spell feeblemind once
per day. They can sling scorpions at opponents as a range attacks. Those
hit are covered in a swarm of the tiny vermin and stung repeatedly for 1d6
points of damage and, if a saving throw is failed, paralysis for 1d4 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Scorpions of the Swarm
A gang of 1d3+1 darakas guard the entrance to a massive subterranean
temple. The entrance is in a subterranean canyon of gray stone that is
warm to the touch. The walls of the canyon are covered in patches of
white lichen in the shape of screaming faces. At the end of the canyon
there is a facade of black onyx with large, brass portal into the depths of
the temple.
The guardians stand in front of the portal, which is further blocked by
a slab of basalt that requires a combined strength of 60 to shift. Several
pits of rusty spikes are placed in front of the temple facade, the pits
opening and closing randomly once battle is joined. Should the guardians
be bested, the pits survived and the slab removed, the adventurers will
discover that the “temple” consists of a 5-ft by 5-ft space occupied by a
slimy shaft crawling with swarms of scorpions and descending 500 feet
into the earth and ending in a giant vault of slime.

Demon, Gallu-Demon (Faceless Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Immune to poison and electricity, magical abilities
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A gallu-demon is a 9-foot-tall featureless black humanoid with a mouth
filled with rows of sharpened teeth. A gallu-demon can polymorph self
and dimension door at will. Gallu-demons are immune to poison and
electricity.

Law and Orders
Mireeum Ubner and her two daughters, looking like vagrants, scrub soiled
chamber pots with ragged sponges outside an untidy manor house. Deep
bruises and lash marks cover their exposed flesh. Their ragged and soiled
garments were once exquisite evening gowns. Blisters covering their hands,
feet and knees tell of the hours of arduous work they endure every day.
Mireeum is the wife of chief constable Da’ Ubner and until recently led
an idyllic life few could even dream of. Da’ Ubner was an influential and
popular chief constable within the city and led his men justly and fairly.
What no one knows yet is that Da’ Ubner was assassinated and replaced
by a gallu-demon just weeks ago. His corpse still lies within the attic of
the manor house. Since taking over as Da’ Ubner, the malevolent galludemon has corrupted the city guard and destroyed their morale. Even
worse, the new Da’ Ubner has enslaved his wife and daughters. He
routinely abuses them and intentionally prolongs their suffering, each day
creating new and more-demeaning tasks for them to perform. Da’ Ubner
hosts lavish and decadent parties nightly, while his family sleeps chained
in the kennel. The family has fallen far from their past nobility. The public
scorns and ridicules them, but fears Da’ Ubner's authority too much to not
attend his gatherings when ordered to do so. With Da’ Ubner's clout and
a garrison of semi-loyal troops, few question his ethics publicly and live.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Demon, Gharros (Scorpion Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  Axe (2d8) and 2 tail stings (1d8 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Poison, spells, +1 or better weapon to hit, immune to
electricity and poison, magic resistance (50%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 22/5000

This hideous creature appears to be half-scorpion and half-human. Its
upper torso is that of a greenish-silver humanoid with long, flowing dark
hair and stark white eyes while its lower torso is that of a reddish-brown
scorpion. Its tail splits into two separate stingers and the creature's mouth is
filled with razor-sharp teeth. Gharros serve as guards, soldiers, shock troops
and assassins to some of the minor nobles and lesser demon lords of the
Abyss. The poison from the gharros’ scorpion sting is lethal if one fails a
saving throw. Gharros can cast the spells darkness and mirror image at will.
the Astral Plane for neutrals and the Upper Planes for lawfuls. Those who
enter from the east will find the gate guarded by 1d3+1 gharros demons.
From this direction, the gate allows access to the Elemental Plane of
Fire for lawfuls, the Elemental Plane of Earth for neutrals and the Lower
Planes for chaotics.

Planar Gates
At the pinnacle of a tall mountain there is a gate of golden bars measuring
9 cubits wide by 12 cubits high. The gate sits in a tunnel that goes all the
way through the mountain - about 1 mile. Travelers who enter the tunnel
from the west will find the gate guarded by 1d3+1 monadic devas. From
this direction the gate allows travel into the Ethereal Plane for chaotics,

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Demon, Greruor (Frog Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attacks: gore (1d6) and bite (2d6) or polearm (2d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Acid and fire spittle, magical abilities, summon
demons, leap, immune to electricity and poison, resist cold,
fire and acid
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2,600

A greruor is a squat, bloated, frog-like demon with arms in place of its
forelegs. Its wide, frog-like head has two 3-foot-long horns protruding just
above its deep, sunken eyes. It moves by hopping on its rear legs, leaping up
to 20 feet. Its arms end in talons that are usually clutched around the greruor's
deadly ranseur (2d6). Its huge mouth sports razor-sharp teeth of a dull gray
color. The greruor's flesh is greenish-brown mottled with red or gray. Its skin
constantly oozes and secretes a thick, mucus-like clear slime. Once every 1d4
rounds, a greruor can spit a line of acid up to 30 feet that deals 4d4 points of
damage. On the greruor's next turn, the acid ignites and the opponent bursts
into flame and takes 1d6 points of damage per round until extinguished. A
save halves the acid damage and prevents the creature from bursting into
flame. At will, a greruor can cause confusion, create darkness (15 foot radius),
hold person and detect good. Greruor are immune to electricity and poison,
and take half damage from cold, fire, and acid.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Village of the Damned
Kulkin's Vale is under siege, with the few villagers holed up in the
town's small garrison. The town's soldiers were the first to die when
Horrkurven, a greruor demon, leapt into town. In the chaos, the town was
set ablaze and nearly burned to the ground. Horrkurven killed the guards
with his acidic spittle, and drove the rest screaming from the town's gates.
The women and children retreated into the garrison and shut the doors,
just in time to keep the demonic entity at bay. The walls are too high
for it to leap, and its burning spit does little against the keep's fortified
walls. The villagers are desperate. Horrkurven lurks in the burned-out
homes.

PCs entering the village find skeletons lying in the street, the bones soft
and brittle from acid and fire. Horrkurven lairs in the fireravaged temple.
The demon has crafted a throne nest from the bones of his victims in the high
rafters of the shrine, and leaps down on intruders. The demon was tasked with
destroying the town by a magic-user who was run out of the village for
consorting with demons. Inside the garrison are 15 women and 20 children (all
under age 10). The rest of the villagers were killed or ran away during the
chaos of the greruor's attack.

Demon, Mallor (Serpent Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 14
Armor Class: -4 [23]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6 + poison) or +1 longspear (2d6+1)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear gaze, foul liquid, poison, magical abilities,
summon demons, summon serpents, +1 magic weapon to
hit
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4,400

A mallor is a 10- to 12-foot-long, powerful humanoid with the lower
torso of a giant coral snake. Its humanoid frame is crimson-colored while
its snake body is black with bands of yellow and red. Its arms end in
sharpened claws, slightly curved under, just enough to tear through flesh,
sinew and muscle. Mallors have black, gold, or amber hair. Their eyes
are white with red or green pupils. Anyone meeting a mallor's gaze must
save or flee in fear for 1d6 rounds. All liquids, including potions, within
100 feet of a mallor automatically become foul and unsuitable to drink.
Anyone drinking the water must save or become nauseated for 1 minute.
A mallor injects a virulent poison when it hits an opponent with its claws.
At will, a mallor can use burning hands, dispel magic and teleport. Once
per day, a mallor can summon 1d6 giant vipers with a 50% chance of
success. Mallors are immune to electricity and poison, and take half
damage from cold, fire and acid.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Snake Mass
A countless number of snakes (venomous and constrictors) entwine in
a dance-like trance on the wide flagstone terrace. The snakes slide in and
out of holes in the stones to an unknown subterranean lair. A shallow
pit filled nearly to the rim with snakes sits in the center of the terrace.
The mass of snakes sits just 5 feet below the pit's rim. Four braziers
with glowing coals emit an intoxicating incense. A 15-foot-tall hooded
cobra statue with its head hovering over the pit encircles the hole with
its body. Subira the high priestess of Lachesiss (the Demon Lord of
Snakes) often meditates and performs sensual ceremonies atop the hood.
A ladder cleverly concealed in the statue's scales allows access to the top.
Just below the surface of the snake mass lies Amaunet, the harbinger of
Lashesiss. Amaunet lies in a state of euphoric mediation. He awakens in
1d4 rounds after any disturbance.

Subira: HD 12 (cleric); HP 64; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 staff
(1d6+1); Move 12; Save 4; CL/XP 12/2,000; Special: Spells.
4/4/4/4/4/1; Spells: 1—cure light wounds, detect magic,
light, protection from evil; 2—bless, hold person, silence (15foot radius), snake charm; 3—cure disease, prayer, remove
curse, speak with dead; 4—cure serious wounds, neutralize
poison, sticks to snakes (x2); 5—commune, finger of death,
insect plague, quest; 6—blade barrier; Equipment: +2 Snake
Scale Plate Armor, Staff of the Snake

Giant Viper: HD 4; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 bite (1d3 + poison); Move
12; Save 13; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Lethal poison

Demon, Mehrim (Goat Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 hooves (1d4), 1 bite (2d6 + disease)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Diseased bite, magic resistance (10%), magical
abilities
Move: 14
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A mehrim is a man-sized black goat that exhales putrid black smoke
when it breathes. It has three horns and jet black, glossy hooves. Its
diseased bite inflicts 1 point of damage each day until cured. A mehrim
can cast darkness at will, and dispel magic once per day. They are able to
see invisible creatures at all times.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Got Your Goat
Wandering the rocky hillsides are Onslow, a hill giant goat herder, and
his herd of large goats. For reasons unknown, scattered among the herd
are 4 mehrims that command the goats with an uncanny intelligence. Onslow and his herd wander the rocky land tending his herd and trading with
other giants. From a far distance, they appear as a normal-sized shepherd
and herd. Once the herd is close enough, however, Onslow commands the
mehrim and the goats to charge while he throws boulders. His tactics have
worked exceeding well so far and he has amassed considerable treasure
from caravans and travelers.

Onslow, Hill Giant: HD 8+2; hp 48, AC 4[15]; Atk 1 large
barbed shepherd's hook (2d8); Move 12; Save 8; CL/XP
9/1100; Special: Throw boulders.

Giant Goats: HD 3; AC 7[12]; Atk 1 gore (2d6); Move 18;
Save 14; CL/XP 3/60; Special: +4 damage on charge.

Demon, Mezzalorn (Wasp Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6), 1 sting (2d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Magic resistance (10%), immune to poison
Move: 6/14 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

The Droning Pipe Organ The walls of this area reach about 20 feet high. An
earthen mixture of mud and clay covers the stone walls. Long-dried clay
cylinders start 5 feet from the floor and extend to the ceiling, the tubes
resembling a crude pipe organ. The dirt is dry and brittle despite its
four-inch thickness. The mud tubes are filled with paralyzed giant spiders
that crash down out of the pipes in a huge pile if the clay tube is shattered.
Once disturbed, 2 mezzalorn demons inside the top of the mud pipes begin
droning in anticipation. The mezzalorns can be immature larvae or fully grown
demons depending on the challenge needed for PCs. Alternatively, the parents
could be lurking nearby guarding their offspring.

A mezzalorn looks like a hellish giant wasp with the head and torso of a man.
When reduced to half its hp it releases a pheromone that gives it and
all other mezzalorns a +1 to-hit bonus. The poison injected by a mezzalorn's
stinger is lethal if the victim fails a saving throw.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Demon, Demonling Nabasu
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack: 2 claws (1d6), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Death gaze, feed, spells, magic or silver weapons to hit, immunity to electricity and poison, magic resistance (30%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2900

Nabasu are tall and thin, with large, scaled wings and pale gray skin
stretched tightly over their bones.  Their hands end in long fingers tipped
with razor-sharp talons and their mouths are filled with tusk-like teeth,
including two overgrown tusks that jut upward from its bottom jaw. Their eyes
glow with an eerie yellow light.  Nabasu derive great pleasure from torturing
and killing other creatures. Unlike other demons, a nabasu spends a portion of
its life on the Material Plane.  Those that reach the demonling stage in their
growing process travel to the Material Plan where they feed on humanoids in
order to continue their maturity.  Once a nabasu reaches maturity, it returns
to the Abyss to spend the rest of its immortal existence there.

A nabasu's gaze causes instant death in those who fail a saving throw.  The
death effect has a range of 20 feet. Humanoids who die from attack are
transformed into ghouls within 1d4 rounds and are under control of the nabasu
that created them. A demonling nabasu can use its death gaze ability once per
day. For every Hit Dice above 7 it has, it gains one more use per day of its
death gaze.

When a demonling nabasu slays a humanoid opponent, it can feed on the corpse's
heart, devouring both flesh and life force. Feeding destroys the victim's body
and prevents any form of raising or resurrection that requires part of the
corpse. There is a 50% chance that a wish spell can restore a devoured victim
to life. Check once for each destroyed creature.  If the check fails, the
creature cannot be brought back to life by mortal magic.

A demonling nabasu advances in Hit Dice by consuming corpses in this fashion.
For every three suitable corpses a nabasu devours, it gains 1 Hit Die and its
AC improves by 1. The demonling nabasu only advances by consuming the corpses
of creatures whose Hit Dice or levels are equal to or greater than its own
current total. A nabasu that reaches 13 Hit Dice through feeding becomes
a mature nabasu upon completion of the act. (A mature nabasu advances normally
for its Hit Dice)

Credit: The Nabasu originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.


Demon, Mature Nabasu
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 13
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack: 2 claws (1d8), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Death gaze, paralysis, spells, summon ghasts, magic or silver weapons to hit, immunity to electricity and poison,
magic resistsance (40%),
telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 23/5300

A demonling nabasu that reaches 13 Hit Dice through feeding becomes
a mature nabasu. Mature nabasu do not have the feeding ability of
demonlings. A mature nabasu can use its death gaze seven times per day.
They can cast darkness at will and silence once per day and has the level
drain ability of a vampire. They can also travel ethereally as though using
a potion of etherealness two times per day.

Once per day, a mature nabasu can create an aura of paralysis in a 10foot
radius centered on its form. Creatures in the area must succeed on a saving
throw or be paralyzed for 1d6+4 rounds. This ability functions as a hold
monster spell. Demons are immune to this aura.

Once per day, a mature nabasu can automatically summon 2d4 ghasts while in the
Abyss.

Credit: The Nabasu originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II one more use per day of its death gaze.  (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.

Heart of Black Oak
A tall, black oak a the crossroads between three mercantile towns has long
been a source of superstitious fear among the townspeople.  Travelers walking
past the oak press their holy symbols to their lips whisper prayers to ward
its evil influence. Lately, however, it has become more than a source of
imagined terror, as a nabasu demonling has taken residence in the oak, hiding
in a hollow portion about 10 feet from the ground. The demonling now has 10
Hit Dice, and is selectively attacking more powerful individuals who pass by
the tree. It has not fed on a heart in months, and will leap at the chance to
take at least one of the adventurers, this assuming they are experienced
enough to be worth the while.


Demon, Nerizo (Hound Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6), tail sting (1d6 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Poison, spit acid, spells, magic or silver weapons
to hit, immune to electricity and poison, magic resistance
(35%)
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3500

The bestial nerizo can be found on almost all planes of the Abyss. More
animalistic than not, the nerizo are sometimes used as “hunting dogs” by
the greater demons and lords. Neziro are man-sized demons with dark,
blue-black skin. Their arms end in clawed hands and their legs in cloven
hooves. They have long, barbed tails. These barbed tails deliver a poison
that causes lethargy and weakness in the limbs; victims must pass a saving
throw or suffer a -1 penalty to hit and damage and a 1 point penalty to AC.
Once per hour, a nerizo can spit a glob of stomach bile in a 10-foot line.
A creature hit takes 2d6 points of damage (saving throw allowed for half
damage). Nerizos can cast confusion once per day.

Demonic Haunt
A pack of 1d4+1 disgruntled nerizo is chasing the adventurers through
a demonic woodland of ashen, petrified trees inhabited by cackling,
fiendish harpies who swoop down to harass the runners. The nerizo are
relentless hunters, but they despise the task charged to them and so take
their sweet time. If a person is caught, they are slowly tormented, all
the while the demons complaining of their lot in life. They take their
displeasure out on the victim, ultimately crippling them and spiking them
to a petrified tree as they run down their friends.
Somewhere behind the nerizo is a nalfeshnee in the garb of a wealthy
aristocrat, mounted on a fiendish water buffalo and surrounded by a
hunting party consisting of his demonic court - succubi and alu-demons
in gowns and stomachers of drider silk encrusted with bloodstones and
onyx, cambions in the garb of huntsmen with barbed arrows and black
bows, and other lesser demons on nightmares, all drinking a liquor
distilled from the sorrows of tormented souls.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Demon, Nysrock (Cobra Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8), 1 sting (2d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Constrict, immune to poison, spit poison
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

A nysrock is a 14-foot-long cobra-like demon with a humanoid head.
After a nysrock hits with its bite, it automatically constricts for 1d8 points
of damage per round thereafter. The poison of a nysrock deals 1d6 points
of damage each round until healing is applied. A nysrock can spit poison
up to 40 feet. The poison spit causes blindness unless a saving throw is
made.

White Snake-Woman
This large room has 100 five-foot-diameter pits carved vertically into
the floor. There is precisely five feet between each circular pit. Each pit
is 10 feet deep. The ceiling rises 20 feet above the pocked floor. A white
marble column hangs suspended from the ceiling directly above each
pit, the lower half 10 feet off the floor. Each unique column is carved
to resemble an upside-down woman whose lower half is morphing into
the tail of a serpent as it joins with the ceiling. Each figure's face looks
down toward the floor pits with expressions contorted in agony. Their
arms are raised defensively. Entwined around the pillars along the ceiling
is a nysrock demon that can move around the entire room without ever
touching the floor.
Crossing between any of the floor pit openings and the hanging column
above it causes the suspended pillar to swiftly slam down and crush
beings into the pits for 4d6 points of damage. The columns remain in the
downward position for 1 round before retracting back toward the ceiling.
The nysrock has learned to trigger the pillars with its spit.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Demon, Ooze (Greater)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d8) or bite (1d8 + 1d6 acid) and 2 claws
(1d6 + 1d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Acid, summon demons, vomit
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A greater ooze demon takes the shape of a humanoid with a long,
crocodilian snout, razor-sharp teeth, and long talons, but is composed
entirely of ooze. Their claws drip with an acidic substance secreted by
their bodies. The body of the demon is acidic and dissolves organic
material and metal, but not stone. Greater ooze demons stand 12 feet tall
but can reach heights of 20 feet or more. Ooze demons are immune to
electricity, poison and paralysis, and take half damage from cold, fire and
acid. Once every 1d4 rounds, a greater ooze demon can unleash a line of
gastric juices up to 40 feet for 4d6 points of damage (save for half).

Ooze demons, both lesser and greater, appear as a combination of ooze and
demon. An ooze demon resembles a humanoid with a long, crocodilian snout,
razor-sharp teeth, and long talons. From a distance, this monster looks like
a typical demon (if such a thing exists). Up close, the horror is easily
ascertainable; the creature is actually a single entity of swirling black and
white or black and gray ooze in the shape of a humanoid.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Jim Collura.

Demon, Ooze (Lesser)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d6) or bite (1d6 + 1d4 acid) and 2 claws
(1d4 + 1d4 acid)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Acid, summon demons
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

An ooze demon takes the shape of a humanoid with a long, crocodilian
snout, razor-sharp teeth, and long talons, but is composed entirely of ooze.
Lesser ooze demons stand about 7 feet tall. Ooze demons are immune to
electricity and poison, and take half damage from cold, fire and acid.
Their claws drip with an acidic substance secreted by their bodies.

Ooze demons, both lesser and greater, appear as a combination of ooze and
demon. An ooze demon resembles a humanoid with a long, crocodilian snout,
razor-sharp teeth, and long talons. From a distance, this monster looks like
a typical demon (if such a thing exists). Up close, the horror is easily
ascertainable; the creature is actually a single entity of swirling black and
white or black and gray ooze in the shape of a humanoid.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Jim Collura.

Crocodile Tears
The skulls of thousands of crocodiles cover the walls of this macabre
chamber. The mortared skulls cover every inch of the domed ceiling
except for a small hole in the center of the roof. A beam of light shines
from the hole down onto an altar made of turtle shells and bones. A
scepter made from the fused bones of a viper lies on the altar. The scepter
has the power to cast snake charm once per day. Two ooze demons hide
behind the crocodile skulls lining the ceiling. They pour out of the eyes
sockets to attack anyone bothering the scepter.

Ooze demons are the forgotten children of Jubilex, The Faceless Lord,
faithful servants that obey the will of their master without question. When
the Faceless Lord went missing (see the module, G5 Chaos Rising, by
Necromancer Games for details) the ooze demons formed search parties
and scoured the planes for signs of his whereabouts.

Demon, Shadow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6), bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Incorporeal, spells, immunity to electricity and poison,
shadow blend, sunlight powerlessness, telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

This creature resembles a living shadow of inky darkness. Large batlike wings protrude from its form. Shadow demons are the incorporeal
form of a demon trapped in the form of a shadow as punishment for some
wrongdoing. If anything can release a demon trapped in shadow form,
only the dukes, princes, and lords of the Abyss know such secrets. As a
result of their new form, shadow demons are especially malign and illtempered. In shadows and darkness, a shadow demon surprises foes on
a roll of 1-5 on 1d6. Shadow demons are powerless in natural sunlight,
and avoid it at all costs. Once per minute, a shadow demon can move at
six times its normal speed. Shadow demons can cast darkness, fear and
magic jar (1/week).

Credit: The Shadow Demon originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Neville
White.

Of Shadowed Hearts and Betrayal
You discover a long tunnel shaped like a tube and formed of dark gray
bricks. The tunnel is filled with mist and appears to have a bright light
shining on the other end of the tunnel, though the light here is filtered
through the mist and casts weird, constantly shifting shadows on the
walls of the tunnel. The tunnel extends 300 feet, finally ending in a
spherical chamber where four other tunnels of the same design meet. All
five tunnels are studded with tripstones and spear traps, and they and the
spherical center form the lair of a shadow demon.
The spherical chamber at the center of the shadow demon's lair extends
about five feet below the floor of the tunnels and five feet above the ceiling
of the tunnel. Both of these spaces are filled with an inky substance like
liquid shadow, the demon often hiding in this substance, which doubles
its natural rate of healing. Suspended in the middle of the sphere is a
crown that shines with brilliant, dazzling light. Suspended in the middle
of the crown is a large ruby shaped like a human heart.
The ruby is hot to the touch (1d4 damage) and holding it causes the
possessor to believe he is Turaj of Tur, king of nomads, and inheritor
to the vast empire of the steppes and destined to rule all the world. The
crown is made of silver, and is heavy and angular. If placed upon the
head, the cursed crown allows the wearer to believe he is reading minds.
But in fact the crown weaves false thoughts, always of betrayal, into the
thoughts the wearer perceives in the minds of his targets. The crown also
grants the wearer a +2 bonus to Armor Class and the ability to fight as a
berserker.
The shadow demon “guards” this cursed treasure, fighting any who
come near it and then withdrawing down a tunnel when “defeated”. Once
the treasure has been claimed, the shadow demon will creep back and
enter the liquid shadow to heal, emerging with a new crown and heart
when fully restored to health.

Demon, Shrroth (Squid Demon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 6 tentacles (2d6), 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (1d8) and
trident (3d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Constrict, sickness cloud, magical abilities, summon
demons, +1 weapons to hit
Move: 6/18 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

A shrroth is a 15-foot-tall copper-colored demon with the lower torso
of an octopus and the upper torso of a powerful humanoid. Its arms end
in 6-fingered talons. Its lower torso sports a mass of writing tentacles
reaching lengths of 10 feet. Six larger tentacles stretching 20 feet
surround the smaller tentacles. Its mouth is filled with serrated
teeth. A mass of long black hair hangs from its head; from under
which protrude two forward-curving, blackish horns. If a
shrroth hits the same opponent with two tentacles, the victim
is constricted for an automatic 2d6 points of damage each
round thereafter. A shrroth can emit a cloud of grayish liquid
in a 40-foot spread once per minute that conceals the creature
(20% chance to miss) and forces any creature in the cloud to
save or be sickened for 3 rounds. At will, a shrroth can dispel
magic, create a mirror image or teleport. Twice a day it can
use feeblemind, and once per day it can cast power word blind. A
shrroth can jet backward in a straight line at a speed of 30 once
per round. Shrroth are immune to electricity and poison, and
take half damage from cold, fire and acid.

On the Beach and
Under the Sea
The Sea of Pearls is violent in the face of a nor’easter, with 5-foothigh waves whipping the shore. A tangled fishing net lies on the beach. A
bag containing pearls and gold coins lies scattered on the sand. Twisted
in the net is a mermaid, her dark hair plastered to her beautiful features.
Her eyes are dazed and glassy. Her mouth moves, but no understandable
words come out. A dead flounder is caught in the net with her, its gills
puffed out in misery. A crab walks sullenly over the beach.
The magic-user Carinea the Golden polymorphed herself into a mermaid
to do some treasure hunting under the raging waters. Her efforts paid off
when she discovered a sunken galleon 100 feet down containing a small
amount of pearls and gold coins. As she was stuffing a bag with treasure,
the “owner” of the shipwreck found her.
The shrroth demon Ursallah the Entwiner ripped the decking apart
to get at the thieving magic-user. Carinea barely escaped by slipping
through a metal porthole and fleeing for the surface. In her haste, she set
off a feeblemind trap that shattered her mind. The magic-user blundered
into a fisherman's net and barely dragged herself onto the beach mere
moments ago. Carinea has no memory of what she was doing; she doesn’t
even remember she's really human. Ursallah rises out of the waves to
retrieve her belongings, and assumes anyone near the trapped mermaid
must be her partners in crime.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Demon, Skitterdark
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d2), 1 bite (1d2), or 1 weapon (1d3)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Magic resistance (5%), immune to electricity,
poison
Move: 8/12 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Skitterdarks are small humanoid-shaped creature no more than 1 foot
tall with crimson leathery bat wings. Its body is blood red and somewhat
stocky for its size. Its hands end in sharp claws and its eyes and teeth are
sickly yellow. Skitterdarks are commonly found in groups and sometimes
use poison on their weapons.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Assassin's Parcel
The small manor house of Armandariz, a wealthy aristocrat, sits empty
and abandoned. A hefty iron chest is the only item in the house's main
room. The chest is neither locked nor trapped. The chest, a magical item,
can open a gate to another plane within its interior.
This particular chest is attuned to hell and immediately gates a swarm
of 2d4+4 skitterdark demons into existence. Once the last demon is slain,
the lid slams shut with tremendous force and cannot be opened again for
at least 24 hours. The demons grab anything and everyone and drag them
back into the portal within the interior of the chest. Each time the chest
is opened, another swarm of skitterdarks explode out of the iron chest.
The chaotic and destructive skitterdarks relentlessly tear large matter
into smaller pieces to fit into the chest. Items, bodies and living creatures
taken into the chest are lost forever in the bowels of hell.
The corrupt Armandariz reneged on bad gambling debts with the local
thieves’ guild. A hired assassin named Thurid Hrolf sent the chest via
a messenger to Armandariz's residence. Armandariz, his family, their
servants and every possession he owned were dragged into the depths
of hell.

Demon, Stirge
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  2 claws (2d6), bite (1d10)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Blood drain, drone, spells, magic or silver weapons
to hit, immunity to electricity and poison, magic resistance
(40%), spider climb, telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3200

One of the most foul and despicable of all demonkind, the stirge demon
hates all other demonic races and usually attacks them on sight. It savors
the blood of vrocks and hezrous, but generally avoids any more powerful
demonic races. Stirge demons look like a cross between a human, stirge
and demonic fly. They have four, stirge-like hind legs and human forearms
that end in chitinous, claw-like fingers. Stirge demons have the wings of
stirges and human heads topped with bristly manes. Stirge demons have
long, sharp noses that are used to pierce the flesh and draw blood.
Stirge demons can drain blood by making a successful bite attack and
rolling a natural ‘20’. The stirge deals 1d4 points of damage per round
until the victim succeeds on an open doors check and breaks its hold.
Stirge demons constantly emit a droning sound from their winfs. All
creatures within a 60-foot spread that hear it must succeed on a saving
throw or fall into a comatose sleep for 1d4 hours.
Stirge demons can walk on walls, floors, ceilings, and other such
surfaces at their normal movement rate. This is an inherent ability and
cannot be dispelled or negated.

Credit: The Stirge demon is loosely based on the Chasme Demon, which
originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission. The
stirge demon made its d20 debut in the Necromancer Games module D1 Tomb of
Abysthor (©2001, Clark Peterson, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Blood Suckers
A stirge demon, summoned to the Material Plane by a now desiccated
wizard, dwells in a cave atop a crooked mountain overlooking a land of
massive blue cattle herded by hill giants. The hill giants produce wheels
of strong, white cheese popular in the surrounding kingdoms. Trade
between the humans and hill giants has proved profitable for all involved,
and the hill giants only rarely cause trouble - usually young males drunk
on fermented milk.
The stirge demon has been killing the cattle and the hill giants have no
magical weapons with which to deal with it. The human merchants are
likewise powerless, as is the prince who owes them a metric ton of gold
to cover his monument building and gambling habit. As all are in fear of
losing their livelihood, they are on the hunt for adventurers who can slay
the demon or send it back to its own dimension.
Unfortunately, the would-be demonslayers will find they are opposed
by a gang of assassins hired by the prince's rival, who wishes to see his
reign collapse. It was on this rival's behalf that the wizard summoned the
demon, and by the hands of the chief assassin that the magic circle was
broken and the wizard destroyed.

Demon Lord, Baphomet (Lord of Beasts)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 25 (115 hp)
Armor Class: -5 [24]
Attack:  Gore (2d6), bite (1d8), weapon (2d6+2)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Roar, breath weapon, spells, +1 or better weapon to hit, immune to electricity, poison and charm, magic resistance (75%), teleapthy 100 ft.
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 34/5600

Baphomet is the demon prince of brutes, most especially ogres and
minotaurs, but also bull-headed humans and petty tyrants. His iron
keep is located within a large stone cavern on a desolate plane of the
Abyss. It is said his castle is a maze of twisting rooms and corridors, with
his personal throne room located at the heart of his maze keep. Those
that have ventured there remember little about the place other than the
never-ending corridors and maze of rooms. Baphomet stands 12 feet tall
and weighs about 4,500 pounds. He looks like a powerfully muscled
minotaur, his body covered in shaggy, black fur and marred with battle
scars. Baphomet wields a wicked-looking +2 halberd. When the halberd
causes damage on an armored opponent, it reduces the armor value (i.e.
the AC bonus afforded by the armor) by 2 points.

Baphomet is a dangerous combatant. Once every 1d4 rounds, he can
belch forth a stream of unholy water in a 10-foot line at a single target.
Lawful creatures take 10d6 points of damage (saving throw allowed for
half damage). Neutral and chaotic creatures are unaffected. Three times
per day, Baphomet can unleash a roar that instills fear in those within 30
feet that hear it and fail a saving throw.

Baphomet can cast spells as a 12th level magic-user. He can cast
darkness, dispel magic, maze, passwall and wall of iron three times per
day each as magical abilities. Baphomet can summon 2d10 minotaurs
per day.

Servants of Baphomet Followers of Baphomet are usually minotaurs or brutish humanoids like
ogres, orcs or humans, and consist of clerics, necromancers, and sorcerers
or adepts. Clerics of Baphomet are called Horned Ones and must sign a
pact of evil with Baphomet. Horned ones are granted access to up to 3rd
level cleric spells.

Credit: Baphomet originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by
Gary Gygax.

Why Wait?  Bring the Maze to Them
While exploring a fortified chapter house of a religious order of knights
(perhaps it lies in ruins, perhaps it bustles with activity in the center of
a frontier town) you might stumble upon a secret chamber in the wine
cellar. The chamber lies behind a bricked up wall that is itself hidden by
a pile of oak wine barrels. One of the barrels, beneath the others, it turned
on its side and serves as the entrance to this secret chapel.
Once one has crawled through the barrel and a short tunnel through the
brick wall, they will find themselves in a cramped room about 8 feet wide
and deep with a 7-foot high ceiling. The room is dusty and musty and
contains two objects - an idol carved from a glossy, reddish-black stone
and a tome bound in blue scales (the hide of a blue dragon) and resting in
the idol's lap. The tome is chained to the idol, which weighs 500 lb. The
idol depicts a goat headed man with feathered wings, one hand raised, the
other lowered. Both of the idol's hands have the pointer finger and middle
finger upraised, the thumb extended and the other fingers curled under,
as though giving a profane blessing. Its lower body is swathed in cloth.
The book contains a number of profane spells usable by chaotic clerics,
though they must be read from the book, as though on scrolls.
The idol is a touchstone. Should anyone make physical contact with
the idol, the landscape around them will appear to change, the brick
walls of the chapel turning into walls of iron that grow impossible tall
- at least a mile high - until the ceiling disappears in a holocaust sky
that occaisionally sends gouts of roiling flame that sears anyone in the
room or the maze of iron passages that now connect with the room. The
adventurers have been transported via the idol to the iron maze-fortress
of Baphomet. Their only hope of returning home is to find a similar idol
of white stone in the maze. While exploring, the adventurers are hunted
by Baphomet and 2d4 minotaurs.

Demon Lord, Beluiri (The Temptress)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16 (70 hp)
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Dominating gaze, poison, seduction, spells, true
sight, +1 or better weapon to hit, immune to electricity and
poison, magic resistance (65%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 25/5900

Beluiri is a bronze-skinned feminine demon standing about 6 feet tall.
Her head is hairless and features four downward-curving horns jutting
just above her forehead. The two lower horns are smaller than the topmost
horns. A ridge of small spines runs from her brow down the center of
her head and tapers off just below her shoulder blades. Her hands end in
razor-sharp talons and her eyes are sapphire blue. Beluiri is one of the
many concubines of Lord Baphomet (and one of his favorites). She is
known throughout the Abyss as the Temptress, for in her many disguises
she has seduced countless princes, lords, and generals of the demons. She
sometimes journeys to the Material Plane (in one of her many guises) to
tempt and seduce mortals, for she knows that all mortals, in their hearts,
always give in to their true desires—be they power, greed, lust, or one
of many countless other sins. Beluiri rarely wears clothing, but at times
when she does, she enjoys gowns and robes of gold, white, and red.
Beluiri is a cunning combatant, preferring subterfuge to direct assaults,
luring her victims by assuming a pleasing and non-threatening form.
Three times per day she can turn her gaze upon a creature within 30 feet.
The target of her gaze must pass a saving throw or become her slave, per
a more powerful version of the charm monster spell. Her claws are coated
with a debilitating poison that saps a person of their strength. Victims of
the poison must pass a saving throw or temporarily lose 2d4 points of
Strength (to a minimum of 1) for 1 hour.
Through body language and movement, Beluiri can fascinate all
creatures of the opposite sex (which could be either sex, depending on
her current form) within 30 feet that observe her dancing. Those viewing
this dance must succeed on a saving throw or fall under her influence
for 1d6+1 hours as if affected by a charm monster spell. In addition,
Beluiri can cast the following spells: Cause fear, darkness, dispel magic,
polymorph self and wall of fire. Beluiri is completely immune to illusions
and can see invisible creatures.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

She Gets Around
The daughter of the king, after reaching her 18th birthday, has become
increasingly decadent and lacivious. Time and time again she has turned
her father's wrath upon a former or potential ally when they were
discovered in a compromising position with the beauteous maid. This
increasing isolation and paranoia of the king even affected his relationship
with the religious orders of the kingdom, several young monks having
been found in unholy council with the princess. This is a particular
problem given the presence of a known planar gate in the depths beneath
the kingdom's ancient temple of Law.
The princess’ chambers in the castle are now kept under lock and key,
though no guards (or anyone other than the king) are permitted anywhere
near her door. Her windows are barred, and though there is no secret
door in the chamber, the princess still manages to get around. This is,
of course, because the princess is actually the demon Beluiri, the real
princess now a serving zombie in the catacombs beneath the estate of the
king's rival. The rival, a duchess of malevolent mein, is a mere pawn in
an attempt by Baphomet and his concubine to spark a war between the
kingdom's ruler and its high priest, allowing followers of the duchess to
infiltrate the temple and remove the mystic wards blocking the planar
gate and a demonic invasion of the mortal realms.

Demon Lord, Caizel (Deposed Queen of Succubi)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18
Armor Class: -4 [23]
Attacks: +2 dagger of returning (Bonerazor) (2d4 + hold person) or 2 claws (1d6+3)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Poison, magical abilities, summon demons, touch of ecstasy, +1 magic weapons to hit, immune to electricity and poison, resists cold, fire and acid
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 22/5,000

Caizel is an astonishingly beautiful creature standing just under 6 feet
tall. Her skin is delicate, soft, and copper in color. Her eyes are bluegreen. Two tiny horns are hidden beneath her long, raven-black hair.
Her hands, while clawed, are shapely and delicate. Small leather wings
protrude from her back, but she usually keeps these hidden beneath
her robes and gowns. Caizel's body courses with a virulent poison that
she can intensify or suppress at will. It is not secreted through her skin
(therefore her touch is not poisonous); rather it is delivered through the
exchange of body fluids with another creature (kissing, consummating an
encounter, etc.). At will she can cast charm monster, create darkness (15
foot radius), detect good, teleport, read magic, use suggestion and create
a wall of fire. Once per day she can cast mirror image. Once per round,
Caizel's touch can flood a creature's mind with pleasurable images if it
fails a save. This stuns the creature for 1d4 rounds. Caizel is immune to
electricity and poison, and takes half damage from cold, fire and acid.
Any creature she hits with Bonerazor, her +2 dagger, must save or be held
(as by a hold person spell).

Such a Lonely Place
Within the forest near the major city of Bargarsport resides Hotel
Frenley, the most infamous house of ill repute in the lands. A bas-relief
standard of a dove holding an olive branch hangs above the door and at
the entrance gate to the low wall surrounding the complex. Those versed
in plant knowledge may notice that the olive branch is actually the leaves
of a toxic “bleeding heart flower.” This luxurious four-story mansion has
the infamous reputation of holding legendary parties that cater to the
land's wealthiest and most powerful men and women.
It is from here that the matron of seduction, the demon princess Caizel
enacts her will upon mortals. Hotel Frenley caters to a wide range of
clientele; payments (not necessarily monetary) can be arranged for
anyone willing to compensate in kind for services rendered. Hotel
Frenley serves all classes of society, but payments are steep whether they
are monetary or servitude. All transactions require a written and signed
contract. Details and bartering are subjective. The majority of the soiled
doves who work the delightful enterprise are harmless and legitimate,
while a few have more sinister origins.
While Caizel is the undisputed matron, she only rarely makes
appearances for notable patrons. Caizel and her succubi minions use this
establishment to recruit the wicked and corrupt the righteous. Second
Mother Iveene (10th-level magic-user) handles the daily responsibilities
of running Hotel Frenley. A pair of rakshasas serves as guards with only
their reversed hands belying their true nature. Only the finest furnishings
adorn the building's interior and the sweet smell of jasmine permeates
the air.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Demon Lord, Dagon (Prince of the Sea)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20 (110 hp)
Armor Class: -5 [24]
Attack:  +3 trident (2d6+3) or 2 meaty fists (1d10)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spells, master of the waters, summon sea creatures,
only harmed by +2 or better weapons, immune to cold,
electricity and poison, immune to water-based spells,
magic resistance (80%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 9/24 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 30/7400

Dagon is the demon prince of sea creatures. He is worshipped as
a deity by legions of sahuagin, locathah, lizardfolk, tritons (those that
have accepted the ways of chaos) and some merfolk. Dagon makes his
home in a great underwater iron citadel called Thos located in the deepest
recesses of his home plane. Dagon appears as a 10-foot tall merman and
weighs about 2,000 pounds. He has blue-green skin and the lower torso
of a black-scaled leviathan. A thin, translucent fin runs the length of his
back, and a long mane of black hair falls from his head and down his
finned back. His eyes are deep purple with glowing motes of crimson
floating in them.

Dagon is a master of the seas. He is immune to all water-based spells and
effects. When fighting in water, he gains a +2 bonus to hit and improves
his AC by 2. As their prince, he can summon 20 HD worth of aquatic
creatures per day and communicate with them telepathically.
Dagon casts spells as a 12th level magic-user. He has the following
magical abilities: Control water, create water, darkness, dispel magic,
water breathing and feeblemind (1/day).

Dagon wields a +3 trident that can telescope to up to 20 feet long on its
master's command. The trident is forged of black bronze with adamantine
barbs. Creatures struck by the trident and suffering more than 10 points
of damage are caught on the barbs, suffering an addition 1d4 points of
damage per round and unable to move until they make a successful open
doors roll. Creatures that extract themselves from the trident suffer 1d8
points of damage from their rending of their flesh by the barbs.

Servants of Dagon Followers of Dagon are mermen, locathah, sahuagin, lizardmen and evil
humanoids that revere the seas and oceans. Clerics of Dagon are called
Scaled Ones and must sign a pact of evil with Dagon. Scaled Ones can
receive up to 3rd level spells from Dagon.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Black Pearl of Great Power
On the day of the new moon, the harbor of the mercantile city-state is
thrown into confusion when small boats moving through the harbor are
seized by thick tentacles belonging to 1d4 giant octopi and 1d6+2 giant
squid, the occupants of those boats dragged to a watery grave and then, as
soon as the attacks occur, the giant cephalopods disappear.
The next night of the new moon, chaos again erupts as those men and
women who were lost on that fateful night a month ago emerge from the
dark waters of the harbor, pale of skin, waterlogged and rotting, carrying
on their shoulders a cassone of black bronze and studded with coral
imbroglios of fiendish mermaids. Six wights, for wights they now are,
carry the cassone on poles of black bronze, while another twelve wights
serve as an honor guard, attacking anyone who comes near. This foul
procession is making its way to the grand temple of the sea god.
While this is happening, the giant octopi and squid are back in the
harbor, attacking ships and dragging sailors to their doom. Moments after
a sailor drowns, its body climbs from the harbor as a draug. The draug
run though the waterfront, killing indescriminately and spreading chaos
in their wake.
When the procession of wights reaches the grand temple, they will force
entry, set down their cassone before the idol of the sea god and open it.
From the cassone will arise dozens of thick, black tentacles, which will
grasp and throw down the idol of the sea god and replace it with a single,
large black pearl, an idol of Dagon, the new master of the mercantile
city-state.

Demon Lord, Fraz-Urb’luu (Prince of Deception)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 25 (130 hp)
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  2 clobbers (1d12), bite (1d10) or tail slash (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Gnashing teeth, spells, summon demonic entity, +2
or better weapon to hit, immunity to electricity and poison,
sealed mind, magic resistance (75%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 35/8900

Fraz-Urb’luu appears as a hulking, ape-like creature standing nearly three
times as tall as a normal human. His head sports large, fan-like, pointed ears
and a large, round mouth lined with sharpened teeth. His skin is gray and
covered with fine, thin blue hair. A long, serpentine tail, gray and yielding
to blue near the barbed end, trails behind him. Two large bat-like wings
protrude from his back. Fraz-Urb’luu is one of the most physically powerful
demon princes as well as one of the most cunning. His deceptions range far and
wide, affecting and influencing not only those on the Material Plane but also
other demon princes and demon lords. His malevolent nature lends itself well
to his trickery and deception, and he bends others to do his will. Those that
oppose him are quickly dispatched.  Those he favors are often captured and
taken back to his lair in the Abyss where they are forced into a life of
servitude. When the day comes that Fraz-Urb’luu grows weary of them, he
devours them or throws them to his other servants to do with as they wish. He
makes his home deep within the Abyss on a smoldering and scarred layer devoid
of most life. His keep is a large iron and stone castle situated near the very
center of the layer.

A constant stream of traffic emanates to and from his castle; demons and
slaves tending to their daily tasks.

If Fraz-Urb’luu strikes the same creature with both of its clobber attacks in
a single round it hugs them for an additional 1d12 points of damage and gains
a +2 bonus to hit with his bite attack.

Fraz-Urb’luu is immune to all charms, compulsions and phantasms. He casts
spells as a 12th level magic-user and can use the following magical abilities:
Charm monster, darkness, dispel magic, ESP, polymorph other (1/day), polymorph
self (3/day), power word blind (1/day), prismatic sphere (1/day) and
suggestion. Once per day, Fraz-Urb’luu can attempt to summon a demon lord or
demon prince with a 70% chance of success, and deceive the summoned demon into
believing it was called by his opponents. The summoned lord or prince must
succeed on a saving throw at -10 or fall for the deception.

Servants of Fraz-Urb’luu Followers of Fraz-Urb’luu are usually evil humanoids and consist of
charlatans, clerics, magic-users, politicians and aristocrats. Clerics of
Fraz-Urb’luu are called Deceivers and must sign a pact of evil with FrazUrb’luu. Deceivers can receive spells up to 3rd level from Fraz-Urb’luu
and are granted access to the magic-user spells phantasmal force and
suggestion as though they were cleric spells of the same level.

Credit: Fraz-Urb’luu originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Scary Funhouse
Nobody in the city remembered exactly when the funhouse appeared
in a winding ally between the Modest Mermaid and Rampant Mallard
taverns (though a few old timers would swear they remembered the day
a hole was made in the wall the taverns shared after a drunken barbarian
was bet he couldn’t put his head through it), but most folks agreed that it
had been there as long as they could remember.
The funhouse was an old brick building painted a myriad of colors
with a door composed of a wooden frame and a stained glass window
that looks like it came from a church - though the image is a bit unholy.
Within the building are five floors of stuffed oddities, performing albinos,
jugglers, exotic women, people with physical deformities and just about
anything weird and disturbing. These exhibits line a maze of hallways one
can easily become lost in - especially because some of these hallways,
depending on the time of day, become portals into other dimensions. The
funhouse is attended by 1d3+1 tall men in black velvet doublets and azure
chausses that are actually nalfeshnee demons veiled in illusion.
In truth, everything in the building, itself just an old granary, is the product
of illusion by its master, Fraz-Urb’luu. The demon lord uses the building
as a nexus between dimensions and a place to weave his schemes. FrazUrb’luu can sometimes be found in the building, disguised as a shrunken
man in gleaming brass armor sitting on an oversized throne of white oak.
Powerful men and women who visit the funhouse are brought to visit
Tiny Sir Knight, where they are brought into his service via his spells of
enchantment. Those who resist are set adrift in the maze-like funhouse,
eventually wandering into some other dimension and disappearing from
the world until Fraz-Urb’luu sees fit to bring them back.

Demon Lord, Jubilex (The Faceless Lord)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20 (120 hp)
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  Slam (3d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Acid slime, spells, summon oozes, +3 or better
weapon to hit, immunity to electricity and poison, magic
resistance (80%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 30/7400

Jubilex is a large, bubbling mass of greenish-black, foul-smelling liquid.
Ooze, slime, and pus constantly squirt and seep from its form. Deep within
the oozing form you notice several large red eyes. Jubilex is the ruler over
all slimes, oozes, jellies, and other disgusting and foul ooze-like creatures
– the cosmic ooze from which the forces of Law crafted reality and back
to which reality always threatens to sink. Known by some as the Faceless
Lord, his Abyssal home is a steaming, bubbling lair of putrid ooze and
slime pits that are constantly shifting and changing at his whim. Even the
other demonic rulers loathe to journey here. Jubilex makes his home in a
huge slime pit somewhere on one of the many planes he controls. He is
constantly attended by and surrounded with all sorts of slimes and oozes.
When confronted, he takes the form of a 12-foot tall column of bubbling
and squirting ooze. Jubilex attacks with 10-foot long slimy appendages
that emerge from its form. The demon prince secretes a digestive acid
that dissolves organic material and metal quickly, but does not affect
stone. Any melee hit deals 2d6 points of acid damage. Armor or clothing
dissolves and becomes useless immediately unless the wearer succeeds
on a saving throw. A metal or wooden weapon that strikes Jubilex also
dissolves immediately unless the wielder succeeds on a saving throw. The
save DCs are Constitution-based.
Once every six rounds, Jubilex can fire a stream of acidic slime in a 20foot line. This requires a successful ranged attack that ignores armor. A
creature hit takes 2d6 points of acid damage (save for half) and 1d6 points
of acid damage on each round it remains on the target. On the first round
after striking a target, the slime may be scraped off (most likely destroying
the scraper in the process), but after that it must be burnt, frozen, or cut
away (applying damage to the victim as well). Extreme cold or heat,
sunlight, or a cure disease spell destroys the slime.
Jubilex can cast spells as a 15th level cleric. He can also use the
following magical abilities: Circle of cold (emanate cold in a 10-ft. radius;
5d6 damage, save for half damage, lasts 1 minute per level), cause disease
(reverse of cure disease), darkness, dispel magic, ESP, hold monster,
invisibility (self), symbol of insanity and wall of acid (as wall of fire,
but deals acid damage). He is immune to illusions and can see invisible
creatures without difficulty. Once per day, Jubilex can summon up to 2d4
ochre jellies, gray oozes, or gelatinous cubes, or 1d4 black puddings.
Because of his ooze-like structure, Jubilex is immune to sleep effects,
paralysis, polymorph, and stunning.

Servants of Jubilex
Followers of Jubilex are evil humanoids with an affinity for slimes,
jellies, and all things that ooze. Clerics of Jubilex are called Masters of the
Ooze and must sign a pact of evil with Jubilex. Masters of the Ooze can
receive spells up to 3rd level from Jubilex and are granted access to the
circle of cold and wall of acid spells described above. Circle of cold is a
5th level cleric spell and wall of acid is a 5th level cleric spell.

There Is No Third Choice
You enter a large, cylindrical chamber, 30 feet in diameter and 50 feet
tall. The walls of the chamber are white marble and perfectly smooth. The
floor is composed of hexagonal tiles of red and green, with a corroded
silver fountain in the center of the room. The ceiling is carved to resemble
a giant, moon-like face. Once several people have entered the chamber, the
walls will begin to spin rapidly, making exit impossible (percentile chance
to time one's leap correctly equal to their Dexterity score, otherwise suffer
2d6 points of damage and knocked prone). As the walls spin, the face
on the ceiling will speak in a booming voice - “Supplicate yourself and
petition the Faceless Lord”.
At this prompt, the adventurers must crawl to the fountain on their
knees and make offerings of their own blood using silver daggers (1d4
damage) into the fountain. If they do, an amethyst liquor will pour from
the fountain's spout and mix with the blood. The petitioners may now
drink from this liquor and petition Jubilex for some favor. Whether their
favor is granted (or even if they make no such petition), they will suffer
a geas from the Faceless Lord, forcing them to undertake some quest for
his benefit.
If adventurers do not carry out the ritual described above, the face in
the ceiling will proclaim them “Apostates!”. From every opening on the
face, oozes will begin to slowly drop to the floor - 2d4 ochre jellies, 1d4
gray oozes and 1d4 black puddings (you can change the numbers of the
oozes depending on the level of your dungeon on which this chamber
appears). If the oozes prove unable to destroy the adventurers, a column
of slime, Jubilex itself, will arise from the fountain and attack with its
slimy tendrils. It will attack each person a single time and, if it causes
damage, will leave a purple mark in the shape of a triangle across their
face. Adventurers who bear this mark are singled out for destruction by
oozes, demons and evil cultists they might encounter. In addition, their
presence will double the liklihood of random encounters in dungeons or
the wilderness.

Credit: Jubilex originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual (©
TSR/ Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission. Jubilex is called
J-u-i-b-l-e-x in the Monster Manual (notice the different spelling).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Demon Lord, Kostchtchie (Prince of Wrath)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15 (100 hp)
Armor Class: -4 [23]
Attack:  +3 warhammer (3d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spells, +1 or better weapon to hit, immune to cold,
electricity and poison, magic resistance (60%), telepathy 100
ft.
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 23/5300

Kostchtchie is the demon lord of cold and is the epitome of hatred and
evil. If there is a demon lord more ruthless and malevolent than he, that
lord has never made his presence known. Kostchtchie is hated by all
(including other demon lords and princes). He moves across his Abyssal
landscape with a shuffling gait, and is rarely, if ever, encountered alone.
He appears as a 10 foot tall, ogrish creature, with yellowish skin and
hairless save for it bushy eyebrows. He has two twisted, stumpy legs and a
thick torso. His head is flat and oval and sports two large, sunken, crystalblue eyes of immeasurable beauty. Kostchtchie's Abyssal home is a frigid
and mountainous realm of ice, rock, snow, and subfreezing temperatures.
Unprotected travelers and those vulnerable to cold do not last long here.
Kostchtchie wields a cold-wrought +3 warhammer that must be wielded
with two hands. It creates a cacophonous roar like thunder upon striking
with a successful critical hit, deafening those who fail a saving throw.
When Kostchtchie's attack roll is a natural ‘20’, the hammer leaves a thick
layer of frost and ice on whatever it strikes, causing an additional 1d6
points of freezing damage.
Kostchtchie can cast spells as a 12th level magic-user. He can cast
cause serious wounds (reverse of cure serious wounds), charm monster,
darkness and dispel magic at will. Three times per day he can summon
1d4 frost giants or 1 large, adult white dragon.

from their mugs and trading glances with one another. Seats will be
provided for the visitors and mugs of ale drawn.
A large trapdoor behind the bar grants access to a cellar, but the trapdoor
is locked and the rotund man will never be far from it. At some point,
the tall woman will emerge from the kitchen with a platter of steaming
caribou steaks and boiled turnips, allowing the guests to take pieces of
meat or turnips from the platter with their knife and enjoy the savory
supper. During this repast, the sound of wolves - deep, sonorous howls will first ring in the adventurer's ears from the outside. They are repeated
once a turn, getting closer and closer, and each time eliciting a more
excited/nervous response from the people in the room.
After an hour, you hear a crazed laugh from the rotund man and the
others join in, rising and forming a circle in the middle of the room on
their knees. At that moment, a heavy pounding is heard on the door. It
finally flies open, hurled by a chill wind, the demon lord Kostchtchie
standing in the entrance, come to claim the souls of his followers. The
people in the circle do not move an inch as he approaches and, one by
one, smashes them with his hammer, leaving naught but a pile of ash and
a plume of sulfurous smoke where they once stood. He then turns his
attention to the others in the room.

Servants of Kostchtchie

Followers of Kostchtchie are usually berserkers, frost giants and ogres.
Clerics of Kostchtchie are called Ice Lords and must sign a pact of evil
with Kostchtchie. Ice Lords cast receive spells up to 3rd level from
Kostchtchie.

Devout to the End
Caught in a blizzard, you stumble across a stone roadhouse sending an
inviting plume of smoke from its chimneys into the white sky. A knock on
the door will elicit no response for one or two minutes, and then finally
the door will swing open to reveal a rotund man with piggy eyes and a
bald pate. He will silently invite the visitors into the roadhouse's common
room, a large, low ceilinged chamber with a roaring hearth, several chairs
and stools and a large cask of spiced amber ale served in pewter mugs.
Besides the man at the door, the room contains a tall, harshly attractive
woman with pale blue eyes and platinum hair pulled back in braids, twin
maidens with raven hair and grey eyes and three well-dressed men who
look like gentleman merchants. All sit quietly around the hearth, drinking

Credit: Kostchtchie originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Demon Lord, Maphistal (Second of Orcus)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20 (90 hp)
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  +3 heavy mace (2d6) and bite (1d8 plus disease) or
2 claws (1d8) and bite (1d8 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Bone knit, disease, spells, summon undead, +1 or
better weapon to hit, immunity to electricity and poison,
magic resistance (70%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15/30 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 30/7400

Maphistal is the second of Orcus, Demon Prince of the Undead.
He makes his home on a stinking, smoldering layer of the Abyss and
commands his troops from his great castle, Maalstege (The Keep of
Bones, so called because it is believe to be constructed from the skeletal
remains of those slain by Maphistal). He is loyal to no one but Orcus.
He does not trust Sonechard, the General of Orcus's undead legions,
and seeks to discredit him at any opportunity, though he does not do this
openly for fear of rebellion by his troops or punishment by Orcus. His
machinations against Sonechard are primarily through his agents and
spies in Sonechard's camps.

Maphistal stands 9 feet tall and weighs 700 pounds. He is a feral-looking
humanoid with two great horns protruding from his head and huge, bat
wings sprouting from his shoulders. His legs end in sooty hooves and
short, coarse, black hair covers his body save his face and clawed hands.
Maphistal's +3 heavy mace deals an extra 1d6 points of damage
against lawful creatures and it drains one level from any lawful creature
attempting to wield it. Each time a living creature is hit by Maphistal's
mace, it must succeed on a saving throw or lose 1d4 points of Dexterity
as its bones fuse together. Creatures reduced to 0 Dexterity can no longer
move or attack. Only a restoration spell can repair this damage, restoring
1d4 points of Dexterity with each application.

Maphistal's bite infects victims with a demonic fever that incubates for
1 day and then begins inflicting 1d6 points of Constitution damage each
day until the afflicted succeeds at a saving throw at a -3 penalty.
Maphistal can cast the following spells: Animate dead, darkness, dispel
magic, power word stun and suggestion. Once per day, Maphistal can
summon 3d10 zombies or skeletons, 2d6 ghouls, 2d4 ghasts, 1d6 wraiths
or wights, or 1d4 spectres.

Credit: Maphistal first appeared in the Necromancer Games module R3 Rappan
Athuk 3: The Lower Levels (©2002, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Within the Keep of Bones
Rising from the smoldering basalt plain is a truly awesome tower. Built
in the style of a Scandinavian stave church, this tower is easily one mile
tall and measures about half a mile on each side. The tower is constructed
of bones, with flying demons flitting about the structure adding new bones
at all times. The top of the tower, should one be able to see it, contains the
throne of Maphistal, wings spread to catch the balmy, sulfurous winds of
the plain, gazing out over the work crews extracting the spiritual bones
of soldiers killed in suicidal battles on the Material Plane. The entrance
to the tower is a door of bones that stands 20 feet high and can only be
raised or lowered by heaping corpses upon a counterweight in a small
weigh house located about 30 yards from the door. The weigh house is
constructed of smoldering basalt and tiled with obsidian. It is overseen by
a spectre, who liberally helps itself to the life force of visitors while they
endeavor to pile 1 ton of corpses on the brazen scales to raise the door.
Inside the door there is a vast hall guarded by 1d4+4 wraiths that resemble
knights in sooty armor atop crimson destriers. The walls of the hall are
lined with raised alcoves in which bone sculptures (see Bone Cobbler) are
displayed, alongside hundreds of pole arms, two-handed axes and swords
and shields. Mulling about the hall are hundreds of zombies, tormented
by skeletons in mail coats and wielding spiked maces. Should Maphistal
enter the hall, the legions are quickly and painfully assembled in tight
formations of ranks and columns.

From the hall four spiral staircases, each 20 feet wide, lead to upper
levels of the tower. Maalstege holds hundreds of chambers and passages,
and could take a lifetime to explore (though one's lifetime in Maalstege
could be very short indeed).

Demon Lord, Orcus (Prince of the Undead)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 30 (120 hp)
Armor Class: -5 [24]
Attack:  Wand of Orcus (2d6 or death) or 2 fists (3d6) and tail
sting (2d6 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Command undead, spells, summon undead, +3
or better weapon to hit, immunity to electricity and poison,
speak with dead, magic resistance (75%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 18/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 40/10400

Orcus is the Prince of the Undead, and it is said that he alone
created the first undead that walked the worlds.

Orcus is one of the strongest (if not the strongest) and most powerful
of all demon lords. He fights a never-ending war against rival demon
princes that spans several Abyssal layers. From his great bone palace he
commands his troops as they wage war across the smoldering and stinking
planes of the Abyss. Orcus spends most of his days in his palace, rarely
leaving its confines unless he decides to leads his troops into battle (which
has happened on more than one occasion). Most of the time though, he is
content to let his generals and commanders lead the battles.
Orcus is a squat, bloated humanoid standing 15 feet tall and weighing 3
tons. His goat-like head sports large, spiraling ram-like horns and his legs
are covered in thick brown fur and end in hooves. Two large, black, batlike wings protrude from its back and a long, snake-like tail, tipped with a
sharpened barb, trails behind it.
When not warring against rival demon princes, Orcus likes to travel the
planes, particularly the Material Plane. Should a foolish spellcaster open a
gate and speak his name, he is more than likely going to hear the call and
step through to the Material Plane. What happens to the spellcaster that
called him usually depends on the reason for the summons and the power
of the spellcaster. Extremely powerful spellcasters are usually slain after a
while and turned into undead soldiers or generals in his armies.

Combat

Orcus prefers to fight using his Wand. His tail sting delivers a virulent
poison (save or die).

Orcus can command or banish undead as a 15th-level cleric, controlling up
to 150 HD worth of undead at one time. He casts spells as a 15th level cleric
and 12th level magic-user, and can use the following magical abilities at will:
animate dead, charm monster, darkness, dispel magic, ESP, fear, feeblemind
(1/day), lightning bolt, speak with dead, symbol (any) and wall of fire.
Orcus radiates a 60-foot-radius aura of fear (as the spell). A creature in the
area must succeed on a DC 44 Will save or be affected as though by a fear
spell (caster level 35th). A creature that successfully saves cannot be affected
again by Orcus's fear aura for one day. The save DC is Charisma-based.

Three times per day, Orcus can summon one balor, 1d3 nalfeshnees or
1d4 mariliths. As their prince, Orcus can summon up to 100 HD of any
type of undead each day.

Wand of Orcus: Mighty Orcus wields a huge black skull-tipped rod that
functions as a +3 heavy mace. It slays any living creature it touches if the
target fails a saving throw. Orcus can shut this ability off so as to allow his
wand to pass into the Material Plane, usually into the hands of one of his
servants. Further, the Wand has the following magical powers: 3/day—
animate dead, darkness and fear; 2/day—unholy word.

Servants of Orcus

followers are most often clerics and necromancers. Clerics of Orcus are
known as Disciples of Orcus and must sign a pact of evil. Disciples of
Orcus can receive spells up to 3rd level from Orcus.

Seeds of Chaos
Amid an endless plain of writhing bodies on tall stakes and weeping
women on torture wheels, the demon prince of the undead reclines on
a chaise upholstered in the flayed skins of his enemies and feasting on
eyes and tongues plucked from the field of victims. He directs the activity
of 4d6 zombies equipped with scourges, conducting the cries of the
damned as though they composed a symphony. Two mariliths guard the
demon prince and see to his needs, while shadows flit through the field of
sorrows, bringing messages of intriques and plots from the other lords of
the damned.

Orcus is, on this day, in a generous mood, and will entertain his visitors
so long as they can entertain him with tales of deception, sorrow, loss and
regret. Should someone annoy him, a stake will erupt from the ground
(saving throw to avoid) and impale them for 3d6 points of damage, lifting
them five feet from the ground. After an hour or so, the demon prince
will send his visitors (assuming they still live) on their way with a care
package of delicacies wrapped in a flayed skin. As disgusting as these
items are, they will provide invisibility to undead and demons for 1 hour
if ingested, but also implant a seed of chaos in their eater.

Credit: Orcus originally appeared in the pre-First Edition Eldritch Wizardry
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1976) and later in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.  Orcus
made his debut for the d20 system in the Necromancer Games module R3 Rappan
Athuk 3 — The Lower Levels (©2002, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: The followers of the Prince of Undead are clerics that
venerate death, magic-users fascinated with death, and cambions and
alu-demons. His

Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original material by
Gary Gygax.

Demon Lord, Pazuzu (Prince of Air)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20 (110 hp)
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  +2 sword (2d6+2), 2 claws (1d10)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, dominate and summon aerial
creatures, spells, aerial passivism, +2 or better weapon to hit,
immunity to electricity and poison, magic resistance (70%),
telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15/30 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 32/8000

Pazuzu is the demon prince of aerial creatures, and is revered as such
on both the Abyssal plane and the Material Plane. Unlike other demon
princes, his lair is not confined to a single plane or multiple adjoining
planes; Pazuzu rules the sky realms above all layers of the Abyss. (No
demon prince has contested his rulership of the skies thus far.) Pazuzu
appears as a muscular human being with the head of a hawk and four
great, feathery wings spanning its shoulders. His feathers are red and
gold, fading to black at the tip and his eyes are red. Pazuzu's heads and
feet end in talons.
Pazuzu has three breath weapons. Regardless of which breath weapon
he uses, he can’t breathe more than once every 1d4 rounds. Each breath
weapon is a 100-foot long cone. The first works like the creeping doom
spell, the second like the insect plague spell and the last is a corrosive gas
that deals 10d6 points of acid damage (saving throw for half damage) and
ruins leather equipment, including armor.
Three times per day, Pazuzu can automatically summon 2d6 harpies,
2d8 gargoyles or 1d4 hieracosphinxes with a 50% chance of success.
Pazuzu can automatically dominate any aerial creature of 6 HD or less
that is within sight, no saving throw allowed. This functions as a charm
monster spell. At any one time, Pazuzu can have a total of 20 HD of
creatures dominated. Affected creatures must remain with sight or the
effect ends. Aerial creatures are defined as avians, gargoyles, harpies,
and elemental air creatures. No aerial creature of 10 HD or less willingly
attacks Pazuzu, but they can be forced to magically.
Pazuzu can cast spells as a 12th level magic-user. He can use the
following magical abilities: Control weather, darkness, dispel magic,
flesh to stone, lightning bolt, shape change, wind walk and, once per day,
wish.

Servants of Pazuzu Followers of Pazuzu are chaotic humanoids that respect and revere the
air and sky. Clerics of Pazuzu are called Aerial Lords and must sign a
pact of evil with Pazuzu. Aerial Lords can receive up to 3rd level spells
from Pazuzu.

Credit: Pazuzu originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Fly or Die
The tangled woodland of brambles and stinging wasps is blocked by a
stone wall of cyclopean blocks that stretches as far as they eye can see in
all directions. A multitude of perches jut out from this wall, as do black
pipes dripping ichor that runs down the walls, forming streamlets and
eventully oozing rivers of gore that form a wide moat at the base of the
wall.
A host of the perches are now occupied by the demon prince Pazuzu and
his court of 2d4 harpies and 1d6+5 gargoyles. The winged monstrosities
stand on the perches, alternatively glaring out into the distance and
then cleaning themselves. Some dive into the bramble, arising with the
shriveled souls of the damned. These victims are torn apart in midair by
other harpies and gargoyles, the pieced not consumed falling to the ground
and slowing reforming into the shriveled, naked form and cowering again
in the brambles.
If it pleases Pazuzu, he might raise a hot wind that will sweep over
the woodland and carry intruders up to his presence, hanging them
precariously over the moat of ichor. He is as likely to be cruel as kind,
so one never knows what will come from an audience with the winged
prince.

Demon Lord, Sonechard (General of Orcus)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  +2 military pick (1d8+2) or 2 claws (1d10)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Control undead, spells, stench, summon undead,
+1 or better weapon to hit, immunity to electricity and
poison, magic resistance (60%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15/30 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 27/6500

Sonechard is a ram-headed demon standing 14 feet tall. He has gray,
leathery skin, large, curved horns (half of the left horn broken off) and
two large, bat-like wings. Sonechard's body is covered in thick, dark hair.
Portions of the hair are torn away in areas revealing masses of battle-born
scars and damage. Sonechard is a general in the infernal armies of Orcus
and serves him—at least to all onlookers—with unswerving loyalty. He
has countless numbers of demons and undead at his command. Though
his true loyalty lies only to himself, he would never openly refuse a
request by Orcus nor challenge his position as Prince of the Undead.

Should the day come when Orcus weakens, Sonechard plans to be there
to claim what he believes is rightfully his. Sonechard makes his home in a
large castle that sits atop a plateau of scorched earth surrounded by a moat
of blood. The walls are constructed of bone and sinew, and it is said that
the souls of those who cross him are entombed within.

Sonechard's form secretes a nauseating odor that emanates from him to
a range of 20 feet. All living creatures within this range must succeed on
a saving throw or be nauseated, suffering a –1 penalty to hit for 1 hour. A
neutralize poison spell removes the nausea.

Once per day, Sonechard can automatically summon 4d10 zombies
or skeletons, 2d8 shadows, wights, or wraiths, 2d4 greater shadows or
spectres, or 1d4 dread wraiths. He can create up to 50 HD of undead
creatures with the animate dead spell and can control undead as a 20th
level chaotic cleric.

Sonechard can cast the following spells: Animate dead, fireball (3/day),
power word stun, suggestion and wall of fire.
Sonechard's +2 military pick deals an extra 1d3 points from blood loss
when it hits a creature. This damage is inflicted every round thereafter
until the wound is bound or magically healed.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene

Demonic Wars Never End
On a bone-white plain of bare granite bearing a thousand mile-high
pillars of salt shaped in the form of dread Orcus there is assembled a
mighty host of dretches, 200 strong. In their center is the bellowing form
of Sonechard, surrounded by his personal guard of 1d4 wraiths in the
form of friars in tattered black robes with sunken in faces that cough
clouds of flies, 1d4+4 shadows in the form of long-legged hunting dogs
and 1d10+10 skeletons in gleaming platemail and tabards emblazoned
with a ram skull on a field striped black and green.

Treachery has forced this army, now depleted to one fiftieth its original
strength, to retreat to the land of salt pillars, and Sonechard means to
discover the culprit. In a 30-foot deep pit there are thirteen mortal
magicusers and clerics, all potential leakers of information to the servants
of Jubilex, whose army of slimes and jellies now wriggles in celebration,
having driven off the army of Sonechard and taken residence in his massive
castle, lapping at his bloody moat and releasing the souls of those who have
crossed him that they might serve the Faceless Lord.

Demon Lord, Tsathogga (The Frog God)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 25 (130 hp)
Armor Class: -4 [23]
Attack:  Bite (3d6) or tongue (see below)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Blasphemous shriek, swallow whole, spells, +3 or
better weapon to hit, immune to acid and poison, magic
resistance (80%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 34/8600

Tsathogga is a gigantic frog no less than 60 feet long with spindly,
elongated limbs and fingers. His body is covered in warts and sores and
all ooze a putrid, yellowish mucus. His eyes are red and glow with an
inherent evil and his massive mouth sports rows of sharpened teeth, each
at least as long as a sword. Tsathogga cares less about the machinations
of men and power than he does about obliterating light and life with the
slow oozing sickness and decay that he represents. He is the viscous dark
evil bubbling up from beneath the surface, the foul corruption at the heart
of the earth. Tsathogga makes his home on both Tarterus and the Abyss,
spending equal amounts of time in both places. His lair is a vast swamp
of filth deposited by the River Styx as it flows between the two planes.
Tsathogga thoughtlessly commands a host of evil creatures, notably his
own vile frog race, the tsathar (see that entry in this book).
Tsathogga's demonic form constantly oozes and drips acid, causing
opponents to take an extra 1d8 points of acid damage every time he
succeeds on a bite, claw, or tongue attack. Creatures attacking Tsathogga
unarmed take this same acid damage each time one of their attacks hits.
Any weapon striking Tsathogga's acidic body must succeed at a saving
throw or suffer a cumulative -1 penalty to damage - a weapon that has its
potential damage reduced to 0 is destroyed.
Creatures struck by Tsathogga's tongue suffer 1d8 points of acid
damage and must succeed at a saving throw or be swallowed whole and
consumed.
Three times per day, Tsathogga can unleash a piercing shriek that affects
all non-chaotic creatures within a 100-foot radius as if by an un-holy word
(reverse of holy word). Tsathogga can billow forth a cloud of thick, dark
fog from his skin. This fog spreads to fill a 50-foot radius, 50 feet high.
The darkness generated by the cloud nullifies normal lights (torches,
candles, lanterns, and so forth) within the area. Light spells of 5th level
or lower are incapable of brightening the area. This cloud remains for 10
minutes before dispersing. Tsathogga cannot use this ability underwater.
Tsathogga can cast spells as a 15th level magic-user. He can also use
the following magical abilities: Acid cone (as cone of cold, but deals

acid damage), darkness, dispel magic, ESP, polymorph self and water
breathing. He can summon up to 30 HD of oozes, tsathar, giant frogs, or
froghemoths each day.

Servants of Tsathogga

Followers of Tsathogga are the tsathar and some few evil and vile
humans or giants. He has few other worshippers, though it is rumored
that an evil cult of sahuagin worships him on the Material Plane. Clerics
of Tsathogga are called Lords of the Gaping Maw and must sign a pact
of evil with Tsathogga. Lords of the Gaping Maw receive up to 3rd level
spells from Tsathogga.

The Court of His Frogginess
A large, natural amphitheatre looks out over the sea. The amphitheatre
contains a natural lagoon, now filled with slime. Awful little creatures,
like a combination of a green-skinned dwarf and maggot, emerge at
random intervals from the slime, wading through it and attending their
master, Tsathogga, who lives at the back of the amphitheatre. Some of the
dwarf-maggots (they have the statistics of bugbears) are swallowed by
the frog demon god, while others shuffle about collecting weird fish from
the slime and offering them to Tsathogga and others climb the rocks to
enter the wide world, bearing messages to Tsathogga's servants - tsathar,
brutish lizard men, evil cultists and others.
Some of the dwarf-maggots carry stone jars containing weird slimes
to the waiting boats of pirates who have been tempted into serving
the frog god, their ships waiting further off shore, captains nervously
reconsidering their oaths of blood and rum. The slime from the cavern
has seeped into the sea, animating the seaweed and kelp (treat as assassin
vines) and causing the native sharks to develop frog-like faces and a
sinister intelligence. Beneath the fleshy form of Tsathogga there lies a
stone casket occupied by the mummified remains of Blebb, Anti-Saint
and servant of Tsathogga. Pieces of this anti-saint worn as pendants act
as a protection from good (reverse of protection from evil) spell in a 30foot radius.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Bill Webb.

Demon Lord, Vepar (Duke of Dagon)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 22
Armor Class: -4 [23]
Attacks: +2 trident (Demonbrand) (2d6+4) or 2 claws
(1d8+2 + hypothermic touch)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Magical abilities, hypothermic touch, summon
demons, +2 magic weapons to hit
Move: 6/24 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 26/6,200

Vepar is an Abyssal duke who resembles a 12-foot-tall merman. His
upper torso is coppery-brown while his lower torso and fins are silver and
scaled. Vepar's hair is long and black, and he usually wears it tied back
or braided. His eyes, usually blue in color, burn with a silvery fire when
he is angered or excited. Under his hair, two small copper horns can be
seen just above his eyes. Vepar's hands end in wicked claws with silvery
nails. At will, Vepar can control winds, detect good, cause fear, dispel
magic, teleport and polymorph self. Once per day he can create an ice
storm. Vepar wields his trident – named Demonbrand – which can fire up
to seven magic missiles per day for 1d4+1 points of damage each. Anyone
hit by Vepar's claws must save or be overcome by bone-numbing cold
that does 1d8 points of damage (save for half). He is immune to electricity
and poison, and takes half damage from cold, fire and acid.

Beggar in Irons
The lighthouse at Shipsgrave has shown for centuries without fail even
though no living being has entered the structure in decades. The aptly
named Shipsgrave Lighthouse stands amid a dead reef littered with the
broken hulls of countless ships. During low tide, reef pillars and the masts
of ships resemble a graveyard from a distance. High tide completely
covers the remains of the ships and the jagged reef columns. The
lighthouse never fails to light at night and extinguishes each morning.
Mysteriously, the lighthouse's glow ceases during storms and heavy fog.
Sailors know to avoid the entire coast during these times to avoid ending
up as another victim of the deadly reefs.
The legendary ship the Beggar in Irons surfaces from the depths near the
reef whenever the sea is at its worst. Sea-bound mummies and brykolakas
man the ship and attempt to sink other ships at any cost. The demon
lord Vepar commands the Beggar in Irons. The ship is an extension of
Vepar's will as he fuses with the ship as its figurehead. While fused, Vepar
can move the ship in any direction, albeit at a much slower speed than
wind-powered craft. The Beggar in Irons under Vepar's command can
submerge and move in any direction. It can even hover above the water.
If Vepar is slain, the Beggar in Irons returns to a pristine and sailable state,
although it must still be cleared of the demon's undead crew.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Demonic Knight
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  +1 longsword (1d8+1) or 2 slams (1d6)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Breath of unlife, fear, magic resistance (30%), +1 or
better weapon to hit, spells, summon demons
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2600

The demonic knight—known by some as a death knight—is rumored to be the
creation of the great demon prince Orcus, the Prince of the Undead.  Some
sages doubt the validity of such a claim, since the demonic knights are not
undead. Though no link has been proven, however, it is known that three of the
most powerful demonic knights (Baruliis, Caines, and Arrunes) make their home
in the shadow of Orcus's great citadel. The demonic knights serve their master
(whoever it may be) with unswerving loyalty. They never question their orders
or station. They are often sent to the Material Plane to recruit new bodies
for their master's next plot or deception, or to punish those that have
offended their lord. On some occasions, they are simply sent to another plane
to corrupt and slay those that are just and good (to the delight of their
master). It is unknown exactly how many demonic knights exist, but they are
believed to number no more than nine. Demonic knights appear as humanoids in
black, gothic plate armor. They are armed with +1 longswords.

Those within sound of the demonic knight's voice must pass a saving throw or
flee in terror for 2d4 rounds. Three times per day, a demonic knight can
exhale a blast of negative energy in a 10-foot cone. Creatures in the area of
the cone must pass a saving throw or suffer 2d4 points of Strength damage.
Strength returns at the rate of 1 point per day. Creatures reduced to
a strength score of 0 are killed, rising as shadow demons in 2d4 rounds. The
shadow demons are slaves to the demonic knight until it is destroyed.

Demonic knights can cast the following spells: dispel magic (2/day), fireball
(1/day), symbol of fear (1/day) and wall of ice. They are capable of seeing
through invisibility and illusions.

Knight's Challenge
In a woodland of shadowy trees, tall and straight with overarching
boughs that produce a canopy of blackness, you come across a pavilion
of red damask silk. From afar, the embroidery appears to be of acanthus
leaves, but on closer inspection it turns out to be lions devouring infants.
Atop the pavilion there is a pennon or with a grisly lion's paw sable and
claws sanquine. The pavilion rests in a clear area. By and by, a dretch
garbed in black, rusty plate and mail and a yellow tabard charged with
the same bloody paw as is on the pennon. The dretch is dragging a twohanded sword behind him and heading for nearby stump, next to which
sit the tools necessary to clean and sharpen the blade. Upon seeing the
adventurers, the dretch will hurry into the pavilion. His disappearance is
followed swiftly by a deep growl and the ejection of the pitiable creature.
The dretch will raise a golden ram's horn (worth 100 gp) to its blubbery
lips and produce from it a low bellow. At this point, a demonic knight
will emerge from the pavilion, swaggering and impressive. The knight
will cuff the dretch, who will retrieve its sword. Pointing an armored,
clawed finger at the adventurers, it will bellow out a challenge to the most
impressive looking fighter or paladin. As a prize it will offer a carnelian
pendant that, the knight claims, has the power to return the adventurers
home with the command word “Zvid”.

As the combatants take their positions in the middle of the dark clearing, the
adventurers probably will not notice 1d3+1 shadows taking up positions within
easy reach of the knight's opponent. These creatures, hidden effectively in
the darkness, will aid the knight in any way they can, including attacking
onlookers.

The pendant, should it be won, will prove to do just what the demonic knight
claimed, in a manner of speaking. Anyone touching it while speaking the
command word will be returned to their last permanent home polymorphed (if
they fail a saving throw) into a dretch.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Devil, Amaimon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: breath weapon, magic resistance (15%), immune
to fire, fear aura, spell-like abilities
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Amaimons stand nearly 10 feet tall, weigh about 700 pounds and
look like bloated, squat humanoids with scarlet flesh. They have a long,
curved and forked tail, clawed hands and feet, and round, squashed heads
with two small horns just above their sapphire colored eyes. Amiamons
can breathe a cloud of poisonous fire that deals 3d8 points of damage.
A saving throw halves the damage. Amaimons radiate fear in a 10-foot
radius. At will, Amaimons can teleport, create a phantasmal force and
cast wall of fire. Amaimons can use ESP at will.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Helly Tubby
The gray fleshy floor of this area has a 4-foot-high dome rising toward
a center apex. The dome is 25 foot around and adheres to the floor with
resin-like secretions. The spongy ground quivers with every step but is
stable and does not impede movement.
Atop the flesh dome is an 8-foot-diameter closed, sinewy hole. The
supple dome resists all damage and begins to swell 1 round after it is
disturbed. After two rounds, the sphincter-like opening puckers and
releases a rank plume of red vapor. The dome then discharges a slimecoated amaimon demon that was just birthed into this world. The bloated
red demon is hungry for its first mortal meal. Only after the amaimon
is slain does the flesh dome wither and rot away, leaving no trace of
its existence. The dome may spew out more amaimons to incrrease the
encounter's Challenge Level.

Devil, Blood Reaver (Garugin)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: dual-headed barbed flail (1d10+3 + stun) or 2
claws (2d6+3)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Siphoning aura, magical abilities, summon devils,
+1 weapons to hit, regenerates 5 hp/round
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

Blood reavers, also known as garugins, are 7-foot-tall bipedal humanoids
with reddish-bronze leathery flesh and gleaming, gold eyes. Its hands end
in blood-stained claws and the smell of fresh blood always hangs in the
air around a blood reaver. Its fearsome visage sports a slightly curved
mouth laced with sharp, flesh-rending fangs. The blood reaver has a long,
forked tail the same color as its body. Blood reavers radiate an aura in
a 20-foot radius that causes creatures to bleed from their mouths, noses,
eyes and ears. Affected creatures must save or lose 1d6 hp each
round. When a blood reaver hits with its barbed flail, the opponent must
save or be stunned for 1 round. At will a blood reaver can teleport, turn
invisible and create a wall of fire. Once per day it can create a lightning
bolt. Blood reavers are immune to fire and poison, and take half damage
from cold and acid.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Stare into the Flames
A wall of flickering red fire rises 10 feet into the air in the center of
the Enlightened Sanctuary of the Everlasting Conflagration. The wall of
flame is 10 feet thick, and runs from wall to wall behind a 5-foot-wide
square altar carved to resemble an open book. The wall of flame never
goes out and changes colors with the seasons. It is currently red with
flecks of orange and yellow to highlight the first days of autumn.
The bodies of nearly 30 worshippers lie slumped in the pews closest to
the fire, their lifeless corpses staring at the dancing flames. Blood runs
from their eyes and ears, and the floor is sticky with red puddles. Kazatul
Chen, the temple's priest, lies across the altar, his skin ripped and torn
into bloody strips. He is barely alive, but won’t last long.
Chorcorat and Heekin, two blood reavers, dance within the flaming
wall, their bodies barely visible. The pair teleported into the temple,
using the fire for cover, to punish the headstrong Chen for his forays into
the underworld. The reavers drained his congregation where they sat,
then turned their flails on the priest. The demons lurk within the burning
wall instead of leaving, waiting to have some fun with people coming to
rescue the priest. The wall of flame burns fiercely, but does just 1d3 points
of damage each round to Lawful PCs who enter it. Others, including the
blood reavers, take 1d6 points each round.

Devil, Flayer (Marzach)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6+3) and bite (1d8+3)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Flensing, magical abilities, summon devils, unholy
burst, +1 magic weapons to hit, regenerate 5 hp/round,
magic resistance (24%), immune to fire and poison, resists
cold and acid
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 18/3,800

A flayer demon is a 13-foot-tall hulking brute with leathery, crimson
skin, a large mouth lined with razor-sharp teeth, and large, round horns
protruding from the sides of its hairless head. Its hands and feet end in
large, sharpened claws and its eyes are bronze-colored and slitted. A
flayer devil that rolls a natural 20 with its claw attack rips the flesh from
its opponent's body, dealing 2d6 points of damage. At will, a flayer can
detect good and teleport. Once per day, it can cast wall of fire. Three
times per day, the flayer devil can unleash a burst of hellish black vapor
in a 30-foot radius that sickens anyone in the area for 1d6 rounds (save
resists). Lawful creatures take 3d6 points of damage from this unholy
aura if they fail their save. Flayers are immune to fire and poison, and take
half damage from cold and acid.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Chamber of Bone
Once an enigmatic shrine to murder located below Bargarsport's streets,
the Chamber of Bone has mostly fallen from common knowledge among
the assassins of the land. To further their horrible goals, the mostly
defunct murder cult enlisted the aid of a flayer demon. Within a short
time, however, the flayer demon had devoured every last member of
the Chamber of Bone. The flayer demon remains trapped on this plane,
contentedly carrying out ritualistic murders in the city streets above.
The chambers that once housed the cult provide a safe haven for the
flayer demon. The bones of his victims now decorate the compound's
walls and ceiling. Bones sharpened to spear-like points protrude from the
walls and ceiling. Furniture and eating utensils made from bone furnish
the rooms, and the floors are caked with inches of powered bone dust.
The flayer demon devours all flesh from its victims, leaving behind only
heaps of gnawed bone.

Devil, Ghaddar
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  2 claws (2d8), bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Feed, spells, vorpal bite, +1 or better weapon to
hit, immunity to fire and poison, see in darkness, magic
resistance (40%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 23/5300

The terrible and mighty ghaddars roam the planes of Hell devouring the
unfortunate souls of those they encounter. They also consume the essence
and being of any outcast devils and dukes that cross their path. A typical
ghaddar stands 15 feet tall and has the head of a donkey with large,
downward-curving horns. A ghaddar's eyes are stark white, with hollow,
black pupils. Its feet are splayed and it shuffles with a hunched gait.
If a ghaddar scores a natural “20” on its attack roll and its foe fails a
saving throw, it severs the foe's head. When a ghaddar slays a humanoid,
spending a minute to devour both flesh and life force. Feeding destroys
the victim's body and prevents any form of raising and resurrection. For
every three suitable corpses a ghaddar devours, it gains 1 Hit Die and its
Armor Class increases by +1. The ghaddar only advances by consuming
the corpses of creatures whose Hit Dice or levels are equal to or greater
than its own current total.
Ghaddars can use the following spells: Fireball (3/day), phantasmal
force and wall of fire.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Arena of the Lower Planes
Captured by devils, a band of adventurers might find themselves thrown
into a great arena with walls a mile high banded with galleries crowded
with bloodthirsty souls in ebon togas and clanging on bronze bells with
great femur bones or disgorging their last nights repast into the sand of
the arena. The largest galleries are occupied by Hell's aristocrats and their
retinues. A prominent box seats Asmodeus and his concubines on crimson
pillows, a great gong provided for him to quiet the cacaphonous crowd.
The sky above the arena boils and pops, with large chunks of magma
falling into the sand and soon sinking out of sight. Combatants will
discover that standing in the same place for more than one round results
in the same effect. After one round of standing still, a combatant sinks to
his ankles, losing his dexterity bonus to Armor Class and falling prone
if more than 5 points of damage is suffered from a single hit. After two
rounds if the combatant hasn’t moved, he will be up to his knees and, in
two more rounds, up to his neck. On the next round he’ll be gone into the
deep torture pits of Asmodeus.
As the new gladiators come to grips with this, the gong will sound and
the crowd will quiet to a dull roar, followed by the rising shriek of one
thousand fifes and the booming words “Release the ghaddar”. Should the
adventurers survive the first ghaddar, another will be loosed, until they
have fought 1d3+1 of the beasts. If triumphant, they will be presented to
Asmodeus who, after marking their foreheads with his glyph, will send
them back to the Material Plane.

Devil, Hellstoker (Marnasoth)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 1 spear (1d8+3) or bellows (1d8 fire) or 2 claws
(1d4+3)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Bellows, fiery body, magical abilities, summon
demons, +1 magic weapons to hit
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Hellstokers stand just less than 6 feet tall and weigh about 180 pounds.
Their rubbery, grayish-black flesh hangs loosely on their bodies, and is
always smeared with a fine layer of yellowish-brown oil. Hellstokers have
ovoid heads, no hair, and small upward curving horns. A hardened ridge
of bone runs from their brow across the top of their head and disappears
into their spine. Hellstokers have long, serpentine, forked tails. Their eyes
are round with red or black pupils. A hellstoker carries a set of bellows
that can fire a line of flame up to 30 feet. The oil coating a hellstoker
is highly flammable, and any fire-based spell causes them to burst into
flame, which adds an extra 1d6 points of damage to their claw attacks.
Hellstokers can teleport at will. Once per day, they can cast burning
hands. Hellstokers are immune to fire and poison, and take half damage
from cold and acid.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sweet Shop
Chuzzlewit Pitt's pie-baking business is booming, with the ovens
going day and night to fill orders from Dunstan's hungry townspeople.
Chuzzlewit is the toast of the town, but he owes his success to an infernal
pact made to keep his business alive. An old man promised Chuzzlewit
fame beyond his wildest dreams. The poor baker jumped at the chance.
That night, the ovens came alive with a hellish light, the fires burning hot
and ready for Chuzzlewit's pies. Fanning the flames were 12 hellstoker
demons that also help Chuzzlewit in the kitchen. Chuzzlewit doesn’t even
need to do anything anymore except wait on his happy customers. The
entire shop is running quite efficiently by the demonic horde.
Unfortunately for the baker, he's winning fans but losing customers, as
the vicious hellstokers kidnap a person every other day to rend into oil to
power the stoves. A few missing people even make it into the delicious
pies. Chuzzlewit desperately wants out of this horrible deal, but he's
scared to say anything. He hints at “problems in the basement” to PCs,
but is shifty and elusive about what's down there. He hopes someone can
kill the demons destroying his businesss and his life. The demons boil
out of the basement to protect their master's investment if the shop is
attacked.

Devil, Lilin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3), 1 weapon (1d8)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Magic resistance (15%), immune to fire, magical
abilities, +1 magic weapons to hit
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A lilin is a crimson-skinned woman about 5-1/2 feet tall with long dark
hair. Her eyes are dark, almost black as is her hair. A pair of small bat-like
wings protrudes from her shoulders. She wields a gleaming long sword.
Lilins can use ESP and cast charm person, charm monster or teleport at
will. Three times per day they can animate dead. They can see perfectly
in darkness of any kind.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Innocence
Cobwebs and vines drape from the trees. The bones of many humanoids
litter the earth; most appear to be dwarven in nature. An intricately carved
wooden stake lies among the bones. A glass coffin sits on a latticework
stone bier in the center of a small glade. The body of a young maiden of
exquisite beauty lies within. She is adorned in black funerary shrouds and
ornate silver plate armor. A wickedly curved sword lies across her breast.
A scripted stone placard bearing a simple verse stands before the bier:
In the darkness of night, beauty in sight.
In the light of the moon, terror too soon.
In the shine of the sun, all will be undone.
Affection survive whilst thou alive.
Ezmersealla, a lilin, hides within the confines of the latticework bier.
A permanent darkness spell envelops the hollow space within the bier.
Ezmersealla delights in corrupting champions of good. With her immortal
life span, she loves to devise intricate traps that tempt do-gooders with
moral dilemmas. She incapacitated a farm girl with a debilitating poison
and brought her to this location as bait. The girl's lips are coated with
the same poison that immobilizes her. If not treated with an antidote, any
victim of the poison will eventually die of starvation and dehydration as
they continue to sleep. Ezmersealla uses her charm and ESP powers to
dupe characters into slaying the innocent damsel.

Devil, Nupperibo
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  Spear (1d6) or 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: +1 or better weapon to hit, immunity to fire and
poison, mindless, regeneration (1 hp/round), see in darkness
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Those evil souls that are taken to Hell and processed to become lemures
but fail ultimately become nupperibo: a life-form even more disgusting
and sad than the lowly lemure. Nupperibos are vaguely humanoid. They
have clawed hands and dark, grayish-black flesh. They are gathered by
the dukes and arch devils and used as fodder in their never-ending wars.
A nupperibo killed in battle is 99% likely to be reformed (by a duke or
arch devil) into another nupperibo; the remaining 1% are “promoted”
to lemure status, having proved their worth in combat. Nupperibos
are blind and deaf but can ascertain all foes within 60 feet using scent
and vibration. Nupperibos are immune to all mind-influencing effects
(charms, compulsions, phantasms, patterns, and morale effects).

Credit: The Nupperibo originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

The Ox King
In a depression of the landscape, you come across a horde of 1d4x20
nupperibo crawling over the mournfully bellowing carcass of some
massive creature that must have once been an ox. The carcass is 30 feet
long, its massive ribs rising 15 feet off the ground. Great chunks of flesh
have been removed from the beast, which cannot die. Should one look
into its eyes, they will see reflected back the image of a king, garbed in
the Assyrian style with curled, blue-black beard and cylindrical crown,
pleading for release.
The nupperibo are plenty busy feeding on the tortured king, but there is
a 1 in 6 chance per round that 3d6 of the beasts will leave the giant oxen
and attack the adventurers. Dead nupperibo will be replaced an hour later.
In the meantime, if all the nupperibo are destroyed, the beast will open its
mouth and, upon its tongue, you will find a cylinder seal made of faience
(a man-made glass as valuable as a gemstone) measuring 1 foot in length
and worth 600 gp. If rolled out onto a clay, the resulting image contains
clues to the location of a princely treasure on the Material Plane.

Devil, Tormentor of Souls
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  +1 battleaxe (1d8+1) or soulcatcher net (1d4 plus
entanglement) or 2 claws (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Magic weapons, spells, +1 or better weapon
to hit, immunity to fire and poison, regeneration (2 hp/
round), magic resistance (45%), see in darkness, soul track,
telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2900

These reddish-gray scaled humanoids stand taller than a human. Their
hands are clawed and its feet cloven. Oversized fangs jut from their upper
jaw and drip foul-smelling saliva. Small horns protrude from just above
its eyes, curving backwards. Their bodies are hairless and they have small
curving tails. Tormentors of Souls, known as tormentor devils, make their
way across the uppermost plane of Hell searching for souls that have
entered the realms of evil. They are in the employ of this devil lord or that
devil lord and return captured souls to their current master, where they
are justly rewarded. Tormentors often employ hell hounds when pursuing
renegade or runaway souls.
Tormentor devils can cast the following spells: ESP, scorching ray
(1/day, as fireball but a 30-ft long ray that requires a ranged attack). A
tormentor devil can track the soul of any creature that enters the planes
of Hell.
A tormentor devil's net looks like a normal net and acts like a normal
net save that it can entrap incorporeal creatures. The net has many small
razor-sharp barbs lining it. These barbs deal 1d4 points of damage each
round to any creature caught in the net, including incorporeal creatures.
A tormentor's +1 battleaxe can also deal damage against incorporeal
creatures.

Copyright Notice: Authors Clark Peterson and Scott Greene.

Devil Gets His Due
You come across a pitiful sight, a ghostly man (perhaps the soul
of a vanquished villain) hiding in the cracks between two massive
outcroppings of rock. The ghost is almost mad with worry, for it knows
that a tormentor of souls and 1d4 hell hounds are on its trail. The hunters
will arrive in 1d4+1 rounds, giving the ghost just enough time to bargain
with the adventurers to save him. He will offer the location of a fabulous
treasure he left behind on the Material Plane. Of course, this ghostly soul
may be a mere illusion, meant to fool adventurers into finding the treasure
and releasing some horror upon the world - devil's do that kind of thing
all day long.


Devil, Alastor (Executioner of Hell)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 25 (120 hp)
Armor Class: -4 [23]
Attacks: 1 weapon (2d6+2), 1 claw (2d8), 1 bite (1d8), 1 tail
(2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Magic resistance (75%), +3 magic weapon
required to hit, immune to fire and charm, magical abilities
Move: 6/15 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 28/6,800

Only for the truly wicked does Alastor journey to the world of mortals to
seek retribution. The High Priest Galanfane and his underlings committed
grave sins against their fellow man and warranted such attention when
his power and influence within the community put him above castigation.
The cleric enjoyed his position of wealth and power for many years with
impunity until one of Galafane's many victims pleaded to the dark lords
for revenge. While Galanfane blessed Red Erring's cathedral with his
presence (and brazenly stole from the townspeople), Alastor and his 5
nalfeshnee entered the world with a goal of returning to the nether depths
with the immoral priest.
Helpless against the demonic horde invading the town, the villagers
fell quickly to the demons’ supremacy. Many fled into the wilds, while
others turned to the high priest and his underlings (5th-level cleric) hiding
in the church. High Priest Galanfane now uses his “flock” as human
shields while he plans his escape. Alastor hides within a barn with the
nalfeshnee assuming the form of the humans surrounding the church
wall. The demons cannot cross into the hallowed grounds beyond the
low stone partition. Galanfane promises his rescuers privileges and riches
beyond their wildest dreams, although he will betray them at his earliest
convenience.

Alastor stands at least 16 feet tall, and his body is entirely cloaked
in hellish red and yellow flames. Huge bat-like wings spread from his
scaled body and his arms end in clawed hands that hold a tight grip on a
wickedly curved iron battleaxe named Grimfang. Alastor's eyes are black
with red pupils and its mouth is filled with rows of fangs. At will, Alastor
can dispel magic, cast fireball or use ESP.

Red Erring

Copyright Notice: The medium-sized town of Red Erring is the site of recent
warfare. Most of the thatch and sod residences lie in smoldering heaps. Barns,
stables, fences and even outhouses are splintered ruins. The butchered remains
townsfolk and livestock cover the ground in a nightmarish scene of bloated
carcasses and fetid pools of blood. The fresh carnage and swarms of flies
testify to the recent carnage. Despite the numerous corpses, it seems that
most of the women and children fled or went into hiding. A small granite
cathedral appears to have survived unscathed through the slaughter. A stone
decorative parapet surrounds the church grounds and cemetery. Six men with
swords and torches scream profanities and blasphemous curses toward the church
from outside the wall. Their blades are heavy with gore and their eyes wild
with fury. They lay siege upon those within the church. Weak and feeble hymns
can be heard through the massive doors.  About 100 survivors cower within the
church around the High Priest Galanfane (Cleric 15). The villagers are
wounded, and weak from hunger and dehydration. Another score of villagers died
from their wounds and their bodies are stacked along the walls. The remaining
villagers feebly sing and chant prayers to ward off the evil that has ravaged
their town.  In fact only the consecrated grounds of the ancient church
protect the survivors from the demon Alastor and his demonic allies
surrounding the temple.

Author Scott Greene.

Devil, Amon (Duke of Hell)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20 (100 hp)
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  +3 heavy mace (3d6), bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear gaze, spells, control and summon wolves,
summon demons, +2 or better weapon to hit, immunity to
fire and poison, magic resistance (75%), regeneration (3 hp/
round), teleapthy 100 ft.
Move: 24
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 30/7400

Amon is a wolf-headed demon who stands 9 feet tall. His fur is
brownish-black and his eyes and teeth are yellow. Amon is a vassal in
service to Geryon, commanding no less than 3 legions of bone devils.
He is completely loyal to the Great Serpent and never questions his post.
On more than one occasion an arch devil has tried to seduce Amon into
betraying his lord, but such attempts always fail Amon's iron citadel sits
high on a flat-topped mountain within the domain of Hell's fifth plane. It
is a great, dark place filled with devils, wolves, and creatures far worse.
Amon's gaze induces fear to a range of 30 feet. An affected creature
must succeed on a saving throw or be affected as by a fear spell. Amon can
cast the following spells: Animate dead, charm monster, dispel magic, fly,
produce flame, suggestion, symbol of discord (1/day) and wall of ice. Once
per day, Amon can summon a total of 40 HD of wolves and worgs. He can
control up to 40 HD of wolves and worgs, whether summoned by him or
not. Twice per day, Amon can summon 4d10 lemures or nupperibos, 2d4
bone devils, 1d4 barbed devils or 1 ghaddar devil or pit fiend.

Hounds of Hell
In the ancient desert, in a shallow cave burrowed into the ground
between two sandstone bluffs, there is a small shrine dedicated to Amon.
The shrine contains a brass idol of the Hellish duke, a perfect sapphire
worth 5,000 gp grasped in its fist. Piles of human bones surround the idol,
and iron loops set into the floor and ceiling, along with copious patches
of dried blood, speak to the terrible ceremonies that have taken place
here. An alabaster cup rests before the idol containing a mixture of snake
venom and the fermented pressings of one of the native agaves.
The sapphire is easily removed from the idol's hand. The possessor of
the jewel must pass a saving throw or find themselves fascinated by the
ripples of light across its surface, and fancy they can see an image deep in
the stone. Each night they will stare into the stone and refuse to let others
touch it, and each night the image will become more and more clear - a
loved one, wandering in the wilderness, frightened and fleeing from the
howls of wolves. The holder of the jewel must pass a new saving throw
each night or find themselves unable to sleep. Those who do not sleep will
not benefit from natural healing and after a week must save each morning
or be struck with confiusion (as the spell) for the next 24 hours. After
falling into confusion three times, the unfortunate despoiler of shrines will
find the condition is permanent.
The spell can be broken by smashing the gem, a task easily accomplished
with a metal weapon. As the gem shatters, an azure cloud will envelop
all assembled. When it clears, they will find themselves in the same
desert landscape, but everything tinted a deep, midnight blue -everything
except the starless sky, which is stained blood red. Almost instantly, the
cry of wolves will be heard nearby - the hunting pack of Amon - 1d8+4
wolves and 2d4 bone devils. The devils are about 1 mile away from the
adventurers, who now must hie back to the location of the shrine, where
they must drink from the poisoned goblet and pray to the idol of Amon
for forgiveness to return back to their own dimension. When (or if) they
do, they will find themselves back in the shrine, the sapphire still in the
idol's fist.
Bone Devil: HD 10; AC 0 [19]; Atk Bite (1d8) and 2 claws (1d4) and
sting (3d4 plus poison); Move 15; Save 5; CL/XP 15/2900; Special:
Spells, poison, +1 or better weapon to hit, immunity to fire and poison,
resistance to acid and cold (50%), spell resistance (55%), telepathy 100 ft.


Credit: Amon originally appeared in Dragon #75 (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Devil, Baal (Duke of Hell)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16 (80 hp)
Armor Class: -4 [23]
Attack:  +2 morning star (3d6) or 2 claws (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear aura, spells, summon devils, +1 or better
weapon to hit, immunity to fire and poison, magic resistance
(70%), regeneration (3 hp/round), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 26/6200

Baal is a tall, golden-skinned humanoid dressed in battered bronze
chainmail. His bovine head features large, round eyes of black, a large
nose, the ears of a wolf and a large mouth lined with razor-sharp teeth.
Tiny forward-curving horns protrude from his forehead. Baal is a duke
in the employ of Great Mammon and leads 5 legions of barbed devils
in his service. Baal follows Lord Mammon's orders without question
but secretly plans one day to wrest the throne from his master (who has
become complacent as of late). For now, though, he waits and schemes.
Baal attacks with a +3 morningstar that can telescope to up to 8 feet
in length. He radiates a 20-foot-radius aura of fear (save or affected as
fear spell). He can cast the following spells: Animate dead, cause serious
wounds, charm monster, dispel magic, invisibility (self), phantasmal force,
produce fire, pyrotechnics, shape change (2/day), suggestion and symbol
of stunning (1/day). Twice per day Baal can summon 4d10 lemures or
nupperibo, 2d4 barbed devils or bearded devils, 1d4 erinyes, or 1 ghaddar
devil, horned devil, or 1 pit fiend.

Credit: Baal originally appeared as “Bael” in Dragon #75 (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1983) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards
of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

The Bronze Pit of Baal
The brazen pit of Bael sits in a landscape of bronze hills (hills actually
made of bronze) divided by rivers of molten copper spanned by searing
bridges of iron chains. In the center of this landscape is a pit 300 feet
deep and 100 feet in diameter. Bronze stairs lead into the pit, meandering
over its surface up and down and leading here and there to doors - slabs
of basalt framed in brass that only open when a bloodied palm is pressed
against them and one speaks the words “Bael Indomitus Rex”.
At the bottom of the pit is the magma sea upon which the bronze hills
float. Behind the doors of Bael's pit are long, brazen halls stamped
in bas reliefs of the lord of the palace and his servants engaged in all
manner of horrors. Hidden in these bas reliefs are secret doors opened by
sticking fingers into unsavory places (that sometimes biting those fingers
off). Being the palace of a Duke of Hell, the place contains hundreds of
chambers and passages, all steaming hot and occupied by all manner of
fell beasts. The halls are patrolled by groups of 1d4+1 horned devils or
1d3+1 barbed devils. A cross section of the palace would reveal the halls
and chambers situated in a conical shape, the point of the cone being
the throne room of Bael, located in a spherical chamber underneath the
magma pit.
The throne room is 50 feet in diameter, with a 10-foot diameter lodestone
at its center. Baels throne is a red lacquered throne in the Asian style, and
it rests on this lodestone sphere. The lodestone sphere is the soul source
of gravity in the throne room, and this gravity only extends a mere 5
feet out from the lodestone. The rest of the room should be considered
zero gravity. Bael keeps nine leaping lemures chained to the sphere. The
lemure's chains are 15 feet long, and allow the beasts to leap into the
zero gravity environment and attack and then be pulled back, or pull
themselves back, to do it again.

Devil, Baaphel (Duke of Hell)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18 (120 hp)
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  +3 scythe (2d6) or 2 fists (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear touch, spells, summon devils, +2 or better
weapon to hit, immunity to fire and poison, magic
resistance (65%), regeneration (3 hp/round), telepathy 100
ft.
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 28/6800

Baaphel is a grand duke in the service of Belial, leading 2 legions of
bearded devils in battle for his lord. He is a dog-headed humanoid with
grayish-brown skin, pale scarlet eyes, two crimson horns, two large
bat wings, hooved feet and a forked crimson tail. Baaphel is constantly
scheming against the other dukes in Belial's service and takes every
opportunity to discredit them in the eyes of their lord, though he never
does this openly; it is always through lesser dukes and other devils that
his machinations come to fruition. Baaphel yearns to be ruler of an entire
plane and is waiting anxiously until the time comes that he can overthrow
his lord. Baaphel makes his home in a great castle of basalt and iron on
Hell's fourth plane.
Baaphel can induce fear by touch, an affected creature affected by a fear
spell if they fail a saving throw. Baaphel can cast the following spells:
Charm monster, dispel magic, invisibility, suggestion, symbol of sleep (1/
day) and transmute flesh to stone (1/day). Twice per day Baaphel can
automatically summon 4d10 nupperibos, 2d6 bearded devils, 1d4 barbed
devils, bone devils, or erinyes or 1 ghaddar devil.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Fortress of Basalt and Iron
The stronghold of Baaphel is a massive shell keep of basalt blocks and
iron bindings that measures 500 feet in diameter, with 20-foot thick walls
that rise 100 feet high and are topped by swallowtail merlons. The shell
keep has three levels of battlements, with “X”-shaped arrow slits beneath
the crenellations and beneath them machiolations backed by a walkway
equipped with charcoal pits and vats of boiling oil. The keep has four
gates, each composed of a iron pikes on which are skewered the heads
of humans, demi-humans and demons, all animated and uttering screams
of pain or sobbing and pleading for release. The tunnels that lead into
the courtyard are covered in mosaics depicting the armies and battles of
Baaphel. The figures in these mosaics seem to stare into one's eyes, and
travelers must pass a saving throw or become hypnotized and believe
them to be reaching out for them - the affected will cower on the ground
until snapped out of the delusion.
The central courtyard of the keep consists of a perimeter walk of slightly
gooey asphalt around a bubbling tar pit. Perched in the center of the pit,
on a bronze pillar, is the seat of Baaphel, with two or three unfortunates
chained to the seat in easy reach of Baaphels claws. Baaphel's stronghold
is guarded by one hundred bearded devils and a staff of twenty lemures.
Besides the aforementioned battlements, the stronghold contains long
chains of chambers - some clad in pig iron, others in bare basalt, and
still others decorated with mosaics (as above, only more profane and
sometimes including people the adventurers know or the adventurers
themselves and causing confusion for 1 hour in those who are hypnotized).
In each chamber there is an iron brazier, white hot, with the soul of a
tormented soul suspended over it in ghostly chains, writhing in agony.
These chains of rooms are connected by passages, stairs (up or down),
trapdoors in the floors or ceilings and hidden doors in black wardrobes
and coffers. A variety of devils and other monsters lurks in this pointless,
never-ending labyrinth of rooms, along with all manner of weird treasures
- coins stamped with the visage of Asmodeus or other archdevils that
shriek when place in the same bag as coins bearing the image of a rival,
dried monkey paws, chains of devil teeth that sup on any foolish enough
to wear them around their necks, bronze masks that twist the face of the
wearer into a replica of the mask, etc. Almost any magic item found in
the stronghold will be cursed in the hands of a lawful person, but will
function normally for chaotics and normally half the time for neutrals.

Devil, Caasimolar (Former President of Hell)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 25
Armor Class: -8 [27]
Attacks: Caasimolar's rod (1d6 + inflict serious wounds)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear, magical abilities, summon devils, +3 magic
weapons to hit, regenerate 7 hp/round, magic resistance
(40%), immune to fire and poison, resists acid and cold
Move: 32
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 32/5,900

As President of Hell, Caasimolar was the second in command of the
Abyss. Caasimolar appears as a wizened old man about 7 feet tall with
a silver beard and balding head. His eyes are ruby red, as are the small
rounded horns that jut from his head just above his eyes. His hands
and feet are humanoid and his nails are ruby red. His long, snaky, thin
forked tail is crimson. Caasimolar wears robes of purple, white, amber,
or sapphire. Underneath his robes his body is crimson with small scales.
By speaking, Caasimolar induces fear (as per the spell) in all creatures
within 30 feet who fail a save. At will, Caasimolar can animate dead, cast
a cone of cold, detect magic, detect good, use ESP, dispel magic, teleport
and polymorph self. Three time a day he can cast wall of ice, and once a
day he can cast power word kill. Caasimolar is immune to fire and poison,
and takes half damage from cold and acid. Caasimolar's rod is a 6-foot
long iron rod that functions as a +3 quarterstaff. In addition, once per
day it can unleash a lightning bolt for 10d6 points of damage (save for
half), and three times a day it can cast finger of death. Each strike by
Caasimolar's rod does 1d6 points of damage and inflicts serious
wounds (2d6+2).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Let's Make a Deal
A small hut sits among dead trees to the side of the dirt trail through
the forest. Wind chimes carved from animal bones clatter in the weak
wind. The air smells of coffee grounds. Thorny vines grow in abundance
throughout this small clearing. Two gaunt goats graze among the
brambles.

An elderly man sits on a swing suspended with barbed wire from two
dead pine trees. His wrinkled scalp is sunburnt and cracked, and his eyes
are sunken into deep pits beneath his heavy brow. A long silver beard
flows down into his lap. A gnarled walking stick rests within easy reach.
A smile creases his lips.

Caasimolar tempts PCs with riches, women and anything their hearts
desire – all the while playing his offerings off as the whimsy of a forgetful
old man. He is quite serious, however, and numerous visitors take him
up on his offers – only to have things turn sour in the end. Caasimolar
collects what's left of their broken souls in glass vials he stores on a
rickety wooden shelf inside the hut. The Game Referee is free to offer
PCs anything they desire, knowing that whatever wish is made will be
twisted to benefit the demon.

If attacked, Caasimolar grabs his walking stick and defends himself.
The two goats are polymorphed baalrochs that rise up to protect the old
man.

Demon, Baalroch: HD 9; hp 68; AC 2 [17]; Atk Sword (1d12+2)
and whip; Move 6/15 (flying); Save 6; CL/XP 10/1,400;
Special: Magic resistance (75%), surrounded by fire

Devil, Demoriel (Twice-Exiled Seductress)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attacks: +3 short sword (Reaver) (1d6+6) or 2 claws (1d6+3)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Enrapture, magical abilities, summon devils, +2
weapons to hit, regenerate 6 hp/round, magic resistance
(30%), immune to fire and poison, resists cold and acid
Move: 15/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 26/6,200

Demoriel was once a powerful angel who made her home in the
heavens among the other angels. Demoriel's journey into evil altered her
appearance and left her with black hair, coal black eyes, amber skin, small
horns protruding above her eyes, and a thin, snake-like forked tail. Small
bat-like wings protrude from her shoulders, though she often keeps these
folded against her back and hidden beneath her robes. Anyone seeing
Demoriel must save or stand enthralled for 1 minute (as per a hold person
spell). At will, Demoriel can charm monster, detect good, detect magic,
dispel magic, cast a fireball, teleport, turn invisible, polymorph self, make
a suggestion, and create a wall of fire. Once per day she can create a
meteor swarm and use power word stun. Demorial is immune to fire
and poison, and takes half damage from cold and acid. Demorial wields
Reaver, a +3 short sword.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Mirror, Mirror
A floor-to-ceiling mirror fills a dead-end stone corridor within Bandar's
Hold, the silver-backed glass filling the space from wall to wall and from
floor to ceiling so completely that it appears the corridor simply continues
on into infinity. The mirror glass is smoky, and reflections waver within
it. The mirror's surface is unbreakable. PCs’ reflections do not appear in
the mirror. Hanging on a strand of silver wire from the ceiling before the
mirror is a golden heart-shaped locket engraved with the words “What
the Heart Wants.” The locket also is not reflected. Written on the mirror
in a foggy vaporous cloud as if someone had blown on the glass, is the
word “Love.”
Anyone who puts on the locket sees a beautiful woman wearing fuchsia
robes standing in the center of the mirror. Her long black hair flows past
her shapely waist. Her dark eyes burn seductively. Her lips are the color
of roses. Merely touching the locket doesn’t allow this vision; but anyone
wearing the locket around their neck, even if taken off, still sees the
woman's visage reflected back at them.
Demoriel's realm is a mirror image of the castle, except it sits on a level
of hell amid clouds of volatile gases that burn in a fiery sky and where
charmed demons roam the walkways guarding their mistress. Demoriel
attempts to charm those who see her, and beckons them forward to be
with her.
Charmed PCs pass easily through the mirror like stepping through a
curtain of silver. The PC appears instantly beside the demon in the
mirror's surface. The PC vanishes from the real world when he or she
appears in the mirror universe. If they are wearing the golden locket,
it vanishes and reappears on the silver string. Demoriel won’t give up
her conquests easily, and requires a favor from PCs first. It's left up to
the Game Referee to determine the demon seductress's needs. Demoriel
is not bound to this particular mirror, and can hound PCs through any
reflective surface if they cross her.

Devil, Geryon (Arch-Devil)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20 (120 hp)
Armor Class: -4 [23]
Attack:  2 claws (2d10), tail sting (2d6 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear gaze, spells, bull's horn, summon devils,
+2 or better weapon to hit, immunity to fire and poison,
regeneration (3 hp/round), see in darkness, magic
resistance (65%), telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 9/21 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 31/7700

2d4 bone devils or barbed devils, or 2 ghaddar devils or pit fiends.
Geryon carries a great horn made of bone. He can blow this horn and
summon 5d4 minotaurs who serve him until their death. This horn can be
blown three times per week. Lawful creatures touching the horn take 5d6
points of electricity damage each round they touch it (no save).

Servants of Geryon

Followers of Geryon are evil humanoids that revere serpents, some
clans and tribes of lizardfolk, and several inphidian communities. Devout
followers of Geryon are called Serpent Masters and must sign a pact of
evil with Geryon. Serpent Masters can receive up to 3rd level cleric spells
from Geryon.

Geryon is a towering creature with the upper torso of a humanoid with
paw-like hands, blue-furred arms, dark hair, and piercing black eyes,
and the lower torso of a massive black and gold banded snake. Called
“the Great Serpent”, he rules Hell's fifth plane. His fortress, a large iron
citadel located in the heart of a great city, is situated at the center of his
plane. Geryon often leaves his fortress to wander the city, but rarely ever
journeys beyond the city's gates. The city is a large, dark place filled with
all manner of filth. Geryon is one of the most powerful arch devils (by
physical standards) and enjoys displaying his physical prowess to any
who would watch, often destroying pit fiends or minor dukes for sheer
pleasure and entertainment. While he is weaker than other arch devils
(in station and overall power), he has allied himself with Mephistopheles
and as such is feared by many. For all of Hell's inhabitants know, if any
can wrest the throne of Hell from Asmodeus, it is Mephistopheles, and
Geryon wants to make sure he is on the winning side when the time
comes to challenge the current Overlord.
Geryon's gaze induces fear (as the spell) to a range of 30 feet. His tail
sting delivers a deadly poison. Geryon casts spells as a 12th level magicuser. He can also use the following magical abilities: Charm monster,
dispel magic, geas, ice storm, invisibility, light, raise dead, symbol of
stunning (1/day) and wall of ice. Three times per day, Geryon can
automatically summon 4d10 lemures or nupperibos, 2d8 bearded devils,

Phlegethon Falls
At a point where the flaming river Phlegethon topples from the cliffs of
the fifth plane of Hell down to the sixth, a formation of basalt covered in
hot ashes juts out, dividing the river into two falls. This basalt formation
measures approximately 1 mile long and up to 1 mile wide, and has a
vaguely diamond shape.
The outcropping is pocked with tunnels and caves, and serves as a retreat
for Geryon, the three-bodied giant king turned into a reptilian horror
by the weird energies of Hell. These halls are prowled by manticores,
demonic snapping turtles and crocodiles, bone devils and barbed devils,
and the ever present lemures. In the center of the outcropping is the great
feast hall of Geryon, a smorgasbord of macabre delicacies surrouning
the ravenous arch-devil, face and hands drenched in blood, great horn
hung around his neck and splattered with the remnants of his feast. A host
of imprisoned succubi dance for the king (or serve as between course
snacks) and offer him large goblets of burgundy received in tribute from
the vineyards of a mortal servant.

Credit: Geryon originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Devil, Gorson (The Blood Duke)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18 (90 hp)
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  +2 battle axe (2d8), 2 forepaws (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spells, summon devils, +2 or better weapon to
hit, immunity to fire and poison, magic resistance (80%),
regeneration (3 hp/round), see in darkness, telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 27/6500

The Blood Duke, Gorson, is a great lion-bodied centaur that serves Great
Mammon as 2nd general of his infernal army. Gorson leads 5 legions of
barbed devils in service to his lord. Gorson is called “The Lion” for his
ferocity in battle and his general appearance. He often takes the entrails of
those he has slain and makes a necklace, wrapping it around his neck or
entwining them in his bloody mane-like hair. Wounds from his battleaxe
do heal naturally, and until a remove curse is cast upon them, healing
spells cure only 1 point of damage per casting.
Gorson can cast the following spells: Animate dead, charm monster,
dispel magic, produce flame, suggestion, symbol of stunning (1/day)
and wall of fire. Twice per day Gorson can automatically summon 2d10
lemures or nupperibos, 2d4 bearded devils, 1d4 bone devils, erinyes, or
barbed devils, or 1 pit fiend.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Orcish Worship
You peer into a vaulted cavern veined with reddish stone. The floor
has been ground flat, with broad steps leading into the cavern. On a long
pedestal of the black and red stone there is a bronze idol of a lion centaur,
its face raised in a terrible roar and two curved shamshir swords upraised
in its hands. The ground around the idol is covered in prostrate orcs,
easily four dozen of them. One orc, a high priest wearing a bulbous helm
of silver and garbed in robes of scarlet embroidered with silver thread
(worth 300 gp), stands in the sea of green-gray flesh, swords upraised in
imitation of the idol. The orcs are calling “Gorson! Gorson!” in a singsongy, baritone chant, getting louder and then softer in some rhythm only
they seem to understand.
As they chant, the walls of the chamber begin to swirl, first in the black
and red that are already present, but then with motes of golden brown
and splashes of an indecent purple, swirling faster and faster that those
looking at the walls eventually become nauseous. The orcs will ignore
anything short of an attack, and the swirling of the walls takes four rounds
to reach its height, more than enough time to flee to the exit on the other
side of the cavern (which is, unfortunately, trapped with a spiked pit, 20
feet deep and filled an inch high with acid that deals 1d3 point sof damage
per round). As the walls reach their peak, they will suddenly turn bright
white, and 1d3 bone devils will emerge from the walls, walking on the
backs of the orcs to the bronze idol. The devils receive tribute from the
orcs in the form of dwarf hearts (each orc holds one heart).
An attack now, at the height of the ceremony, has a 1% chance per
round, cumulative, of drawing the attention of Gorson and bringing him
to the Material Plane to defend his temple, essentially swapping places
with his idol. Even if the devils and orcs are destroyed without drawing
Gorson's fiendish personage to the temple, the Blood Duke will take note
of the adventurers and mark them for destruction.

Devil, Hutijin (Duke of Hell)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 17 (85 hp)
Armor Class: -5 [24]
Attack:  +3 flaming trident (2d8 plus 1d6 fire) or net of
snaring or 2 claws (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear, spells, summon devils, +2 or better weapon to
hit, immunity to fire and poison, regeneration (3 hp/round),
magic resistance (65%), see in darkness, telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 28/6800

Hutijin is a tall humanoid with bat-like wings, a whip-like tail and dark
red, scaled skin. He has a mouth filled with sharpened teeth and two
oversized canine teeth and upward curving horns project from his head.
Hutijin is a loyal servant of Mephistopheles and commands 2 companies
of pit fiends in the infernal armies of the eighth plane of Hell. Hutijin
is a noble of Mephistopheles’ court and commands much respect from
the other dukes and nobles. His battle prowess and strong demeanor
command respect from the other dukes of Hell.
Hutijin can cause fear by speaking. Creatures within 30 feet that hear
his voice must succeed on a saving throw or be affected as though by
a fear spell (caster level 20th). He can also cast the following spells:
Animate dead, cure serious wounds, dispel magic, fireball, hold monster,
invisibility, polymorph self, produce flame, suggestion, symbol of stunning
(1/day) and wall of fire. Twice per day Hutijin can automatically summon
2d10 lemures, 2d4 ice devils or erinyes, 1d4 barbed devils, or 1d2 pit
fiends.
Upon command, Hutijin's trident is sheathed in fire. The fire does not
harm the wielder, but deals an extra 1d6 points of damage on a successful
hit. His magical net holds fast any creature it hits.

Credit: Hutijin originally appeared in Dragon #75 (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/ Wizards of the
Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

8th Column Goes to War
A column of devils heads towards a conflict with a demonic army. The
devils are mounted upon giant, fiendish elephants, their tusks encased
in iron and houdahs of bronzewood and silver swaying atop their bony
backs. In the center of the column, four of the beasts struggle beneath the
weight of a giant palanquin of marble holding an onion-domed veranda
of bronze and porphyry. The palaquin houses Hutijin, a duke of Hell, who
lounges on ash gray pillows plucking on a sitar as six fire nymphs dance
for him. The other elephants are mounted by 1d4+2 ice devils and 1d2 pit
fiends lead the assemblage across the bleak steppe of ebon grasses and
bleached white almond trees.

Devil, Lilith (Former Queen of Hell)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 17 (71 hp)
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4), 1 weapon (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: +2 magic weapons to hit, magic resistance (65%),
immune to fire, magical abilities, summon minions
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 20/3,400

Lilith is an insanely comely female standing 5’7” tall and weighing
roughly 130 pounds. Her skin is cinnamon colored and her hair is waist
length and blood red. She has a small pair of leathery black bat-like
wings. Lilith can use ESP and cast fireball, hold person, charm person or
charm monster, suggestion and teleport at will. Three times a day she can
cast lightning bolt and wall of fire. One a week she can grant a wish. She
can see perfectly in darkness of any kind. Lilth can summon 1d4+4 lilins
with a 100% chance. She carries a +2 longsword that can fire a finger of
death spell 3 times each day.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Home Sweet Hell
The desposed queen of hell has no permanent home. Her castle of
basalt destructively rises from the ground in seemingly random areas and
planes. The roving castle remains only long enough for Lilith to subjugate
the populace to her will and wicked ways before it sinks into the ground.
Where it stood is a permanent barren scar burned upon the earth. The
castle resembles a jagged stalagmite reaching nearly 500 feet at its peak.
Concealed balconies and exposed stairs coil around the tower's exterior.
Plumes of smoke billow from hollow spires and glowing red flames blast
out of the windows each night. The tower has a single massive iron door
that opens only at night. The spacious rooms of the castle are elegantly
decorated and sparsely inhabited. Ghosts, demons (especially lilins and
mariliths), cultist of Lilith and other servants populate the corridors
and chambers. Depraved titans that have fallen from the heavens serve
as guards and an ancient subdued gold dragon acts as a mount. Lilith
managed to take her concubines and loyalists with her in her exodus from
hell.
Occasionally, the castle appears without disrupting the area it settles
in. More often, however, the arrival of the castle causes great battles to
begin, children to be kidnapped, fires to spread unchecked across the
land or entire villages to vanish. If Lilith has a master plan, it remains
a secret. It is rumored that she has enslaved kingdoms and waged wars
upon mankind only to disappear at her moment of triumph.

Devil, Lucifer (Prince of Darkness)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 25 (150 hp)
Armor Class: -6 [25]
Attack:  Rod of Infernus (3d6), bite (2d4 plus poison) or
2 claws (2d8), bite (2d4 plus poison), tail sting (1d8 plus
poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Gaze weapons, spells, summon devils, +3 or better
weapon to hit, immunity to fire and poison, regeneration
(4 hp/round), magic resistance (90%), see in darkness,
telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 21/30 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 40/10400

and vice versa. No creature, it is thought, stands a chance against Lucifer
on Infernus, not even the arch-devils that stood against him a millennia
ago. But Lucifer knows that when the battle comes, he will have to fight
the arch-devils on their own planes, not on Infernus, and he is preparing
for just that. By sending his agents to the Material Plane to corrupt lawful
beings and convert those currently paying homage to Hell's rulers,
Lucifer grows in strength. And this strength gives him power, power that
surpasses any he ever had—including his near deific powers he possessed
in the planes of good. And when his power finally reaches its pinnacle, he
will travel to Hell and destroy it and every single inhabitant.
Lucifer is an exquisitely handsome humanoid with jet black hair and
a forked beard. His hands end in wicked claws and his feet are cloven.
A long snake-like tail dances behind him and intertwines itself around
the massive triple-pronged pitchfork he carries. Two oversized and

Lucifer has many names: The Prince of Lies,
The Prince of Darkness, The Adversary, The
Prince of Light, and Satan. It is believed that
Lucifer was the first devil in existence, having
been cast down from the heavens when he
challenged the rulings of the gods of law.
After being cast down, Lucifer constructed
a plane he called Hell. There he built his
palace of iron and basalt on the lowest and
darkest region of Hell. He divided this realm
into nine distinct regions and appointed his
closest allies to rule. Each lord was allowed
to mold and shape his domain as he saw fit,
but all paid homage to Lucifer.
A millennia passed and Lucifer reigned
supreme in Hell. During this time, one of the
lieutenants (each of which had now become
known as arch-devils or rulers) decided he
could do a much better job of running Hell than
Lucifer could. Asmodeus coveted the Throne of
Hell and wanted it for himself. Using his powers of
persuasion, he promised each and every other archdevil that stood with him and challenged Lucifer a larger
role in the “new” Hells. Those that stood against him, he said,
would be destroyed or cast out of Hell along with Lucifer when the
end came. This time in Hell's history became known as the Great
Uprising.
Asmodeus managed to sway every single arch-devil, save one.
Belial refused to stand with Asmodeus and barely escaped capture
at the hands of the other arch-devils. When the battle for Hell's
Throne commenced, Belial, Lucifer, and their allies stood fast
against the mighty armies of the other arch-devils. In the end
however, the sheer numbers of devils that fought against Lucifer
overwhelmed his armies and those that stood with him. Lucifer
and his allies were forced to flee Hell or face destruction. The sole
exception was Belial. Near the end of the war when he saw that
Lucifer would likely lose the Throne, Belial turned and joined
Asmodeus’ ranks and helped oust Lucifer from Hell.
Cast out, Lucifer wanted vengeance. But vengeance required
power, and he was tired, injured, and weakened from the time spent
battling in Hell. He needed a place to rest, a place to grow in power,
and a place to plan. Thus he created Infernus, a plane of eternal
and everlasting fire and suffering: one plane, one ruler; created by
his own hands, his own blood, and a portion of his very essence.
From his great keep, Malefacta, Lucifer waits for the day he can
challenge for the Throne of Hell again.
Lucifer is said to be one with the plane. As the gods of law are to
the upper planes, so is Lucifer to Infernus. Nothing goes unnoticed
by him on Infernus. All movements are seen, all whispers are heard.
A plan is not hatched or contrived in this place without Lucifer's
knowledge. When people speak of Infernus, they speak of Lucifer

Daemon to Dust Digger
Servants of Lucifer

backward-curving blackened horns jut from his head. He is cloaked in a
suit of banded armor that glistens with the color of the night sky.
Lucifer has two gaze weapons. Each gaze weapon has a range of 30 feet.
His first forces victims to pass a saving throw or have their alignment shift
one step toward chaotic. The second gaze weapon curses the victim with
a -4 penalty to all attack rolls and saving throws.
Lucifer's tail ends in a deadly stinger that delivers lethal venom.
Lucifer casts spells as a 15th level cleric and a 12th level magic-user.
He can also use the following magical abilities at will: Animate dead,
charm monster, darkness, dispel magic, ESP, fireball, geas, hold monster,
ice storm, invisibility, locate object, meteor swarm (2/day), phantasmal
force, polymorph self, produce flame, pyrotechnics, restoration (2/day),
shapechange (2/day), symbol of death (1/day), symbol of fear (2/day),
teleport, wall of fire, wall of ice and wish (1/day).
Once per week, Lucifer can attempt to summon each arch devil to his
palace on the nethermost plane of Hell. The arch devil can resist with its
magic resistance, but gets no saving throw. Lucifer cannot currently use
this ability while in Infernus. Three times per day, Lucifer can summon
4d10 lemures or nupperibos, 2d8 bearded devils or chain devils, 2d4 bone
devils, ice devils, or erinyes, 1d6 barbed devils or ghaddar devils, or 1d3
pit fiends.
Rod of Infernus: Lucifer's black iron rod functions as a +5 heavy mace.
Any lawful creature that touches the rod must pass a saving throw or
suffer 10d6 points of electricity damage per round. Once per round, and
no more than five times per day, the rod can fire a ray to a range of 60 feet.
A creature struck by this ray must succeed on a saving throw at -2 or be
annihilated instantly—not even a trace of dust is left behind. No form of
mortal magic can restore life to a creature annihilated by this ray. Once
per round, and no more than three times per day, the rod can fire a ray of
hellish-red energy to a range of 60 feet that functions as a magic jar spell.
A target can make a saving throw to resist the effects. If failed, the victim's
soul vanishes into Lucifer's rod. Up to 10 such souls can be held in the
rod at one time.

Followers of Lucifer are far and wide and consist of evil humanoids;
usually clerics, magic-users, frustrated artists and ambitious politicans
and nobles. Devout followers of Lucifer are called Dark Cardinals and
must sign a pact of evil with Lucifer. Dark Cardinals can receive up to 5th
level cleric spells from Lucifer.

Damned if You Do . . .
On a city street or country lane you come across a young boy, perhaps
seven or eight years old, with a cherubic face and dressed in the garb
of wealthy yeoman's son. He is kneeling on the ground looking over a
ring he has drawn in the sand with a stick. Inside the ring, he has set two
beetles against one another, tying them together with a length of yarn.
“It is terrible to see them fight, and father says I shouldn’t, but I feel I
must. What would you do?”, he asks in a tone to old for his young face.
If the adventurers chide the boy, he will look up abruptly, a terrible
grimace on his face and fire in his eyes and 1d3+1 pit fiends erupting from
the ground around the adventurers.
If the adventurers side with the boy, he will pick up the beetles, slowly
raise his ice blue eyes and give a smile devoid of mirth. Extending his
hand as though to give the adventurers something, he will drop in his
enabler's hand a scarab carved from lapis lazuli. Once per day, for one
hour, this scarab can be set on the ground and annointed with a drop of
blood. It will turn into a giant rhinoceros beetle and serve the enabler
loyally, attacking his foes, trampling houses on his or her behest or serving
as a mount.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Devil, Moloch (Arch-Devil)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20 (100 hp)
Armor Class: -4 [23]
Attack:  +3 six-tailed whip (2d8 plus 1d6 electricity), bite
(2d8) or 2 claws (2d6) and bite (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, spells, summon devils, +2 or better
weapon to hit, immunity to fire and poison, regeneration
(3 hp/round), magic resistance (70%), see in darkness,
telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 31/7700

powdered hair in shades of aqua, puce and crimson and they are quite
beautiful. They speak with the newcomers, discussing any subject one
wishes and, though they chatter on and on, they never seem to reveal
anything of any import.
Gradually, the room becomes warmer and warmer, and after a full turn,
the women begin to melt like candles, grasping at the newcomers and
burning their flesh and making it difficult to move. The paper on the walls
begins to peel, revealing iron walls underneath that glow red. Each round,
the room becomes hotter, causing 1d6 points of damage the first round,
1d8 the next, then 1d10, 2d6, 3d6 and so on until nothing remains in the
room but ash and molten metal.
The bronze skinned man will regard all of this with amusement, for he
is Moloch, the lord of fire. He makes no attempt to kill the adventurers
or even stop them trying to escape up the chimney (200 feet high and
filled by now with choking, suffocating smoke). Wise adventurers may
notice a single cool spot in the center of the room, which turns out to be
a circular trapdoor that requires great strength to lift, but which opens
into a vertical shaft that leads to the caverns of the ice devils. One can
also escape immolation by swearing themselves to Moloch, who gladly
accepts their veneration.

Moloch rules the sixth plane of Hell, a flat, stinking plane of acrid
smoke and soot. He is currently plotting to wrest control of the plane
completely from its true ruler, Baalzebul, for Moloch is nothing more
than a lieutenant in Baalzebul's infernal army or seneschal to Baalzebul's
court. Yet before he puts in motion steps to secure his plane, he must first
deal with the machinations of the Great Serpent, Geryon. Geryon and
Moloch hate each other; their infernal armies are constantly warring with
each other either openly or through subterfuge.
Moloch is a massive, barrel-chested, hairless humanoid that stands 14
feet tall. His head is squat and large and its oversized mouth is filled with
rows of wickedly-sharp teeth. His eyes are sapphire blue and his large,
curving horns are black. His flesh is dark brown. He wields a long black
metal rod with 6 long pliable metal tails.
Once per round, Moloch can breathe a cone of fear to a range of 30 feet.
Affected creatures must succeed on a saving throw or be affected as by
a fear spell.
Moloch casts spells as a 12th level cleric. He can use the following
magical abilities at will: Animate dead, charm monster, dispel magic,
firestorm (1/day), fly, geas, phantasmal force, polymorph self, produce
flame, raise dead, suggestion, symbol of stunning (1/day), wall of fire.
Twice per day, Moloch can summon 4d10 lemures or nupperibos, 2d6
bearded devils, 2d4 bone devils, 1d4 horned devils or barbed devils, or
1d2 pit fiends.
Unholy Shocking Six-Tailed Whip: Moloch's +3 six-tailed whip deals
an extra 1d6 points of electricity damage on a successful hit.

Credit: Moloch originally appeared in Dragon #75 (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/ Wizards of the
Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Servants of Moloch

Followers of Moloch are evil humanoids and usually consist of
assassins, clerics and magic-users. Devout followers of Moloch are called
Knights of Moloch and must sign a pact of evil with Moloch. Knights can
receive up to 3rd level cleric spells from Moloch.

Viva La Revolution!
The ground beneath the adventurers falls away and they find themselves
falling through a twisted chimney of basalt and ash. The fall lasts a full
minute and inflicts 4d6 points of damage (save for half). Finally depositing
them in the hearth (not currently containing a fire, thankfully) of what
appears to be a salon of revolutionary Paris. The room is 30 feet wide
and 40 feet long and furnished with impeccable taste - cherrywood tables
inlaid with ivory, bronze busts, tall vases of fragrant blooms, etc. Sitting
on a crimson settee in the middle of the room is a tall man with bronzed
skin in the garb of a French aristocrat. Four women, also dressed in finery
and riches, huddle about him, all sipping on coffee from porcelain cups, a
selection of sweets on the low table before them.
As the adventurers enter the chamber, the women leap up and draw
their fans as the man slowly turns to regard them. A smile slowly comes
to his face and he stands and bows and welcomes them with a sweep of
his long arm. The women now hover around the newcomers and guide
them to seats. Servants appear from nowhere holding trays of coffee and
sandwiches. The women have alabaster skin, tall piles of scented and

Devil, Titivilus (Duke of Hell)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 13 (65 hp)
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  +2 silver rapier (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear touch, spells, summon devils, +2 or better
weapon to hit, immunity to fire and poison, magic
resistance (70%), regeneration (3 hp/round), see in darkness,
telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 18/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 24/5600

Titivilus the Confuser resembles a satyr with a round hairless head,
the lower torso of a goat, cloven feet, and clawed hands. Small black
leathery wings sprout from his back. His eyes are the color of coal. He
serves Lord Dispater as messenger and chamberlain, and his ability to
manipulate others is legendary throughout the Hells. Titivilus spends
most of his days in his tower, a large structure composed of blackened
iron. When encountered away from his tower he usually has a small
retinue of bearded devils or erinyes with him.
Titivilus can induce fear by touch (requires a successful attack that
ignores one's armor bonus to AC). An affected creature must succeed
on a saving throw or be affected as by a fear spell. Titivilus can also
cast animate dead, charm person, confusion, dispel magic, feeblemind (1/
day), invisibility, polymorph self, suggestion, symbol of stunning (1/day),
ventriloquism. Twice per day, Titivilus can automatically summon 4d10
lemures or nupperibos, 1d4 bone devils or erinyes, 1d2 horned devils, or
1 pit fiend.
Silver Rapier: Titivilus's +2 rapier is constructed of silver and causes
burning wounds that cannot be healed naturally.

Credit: Titivilus originally appeared in Dragon #75 (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1983) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/ Wizards
of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Dance With the Devil
In the throne room of a great prince and patron of the adventurers
(or chambers of a senate or lord mayor or counting house of a wealthy
merchant-prince) the doors will swing open to give entrance to Titivilus
in all his glory. A lacy hankerchief at his nose and a sneer on his lips, he
will slowly and gracefully approach the ruler of the place, tapping his
black cane (his rapier in disguise) as he walks. At the foot of the throne,
he will give a cursory bow with a grand flourish and speak thusly:
“You sit on your throne, throngs hanging on your every word, a
beauteous lady by your side and a bonny child on your knee. Clearly, sir,
the contract is fulfilled and your child now enters the house of Father Dis
for tutelage in the dark arts. Stand and deliver, milord.”
Should the king appear ungracious or hesitant, the Duke of Hell will
doff his cap and, reaching into it, produce three black doves. Flinging
them into the air, they will take the form of erinyes and swoop on the
young princess, seizing her from her nurse. Titivilus will tap his cane
upon the floor, opening up a sulfurous pit that bathes the throne room in a
reddish glow and contorts the faces of the onlookers into masks of horror.
“Should you feel yourself misused, you may send representative to the
iron city to petition for a renegotiation of terms.”
At this, the erinyes will swoop over the crowd and into the pit. Titivilus
will toss a black egg on the ground, remarking “This will guide you,” and
then step into the pit, which vanish from existance without a trace.
The egg holds an infant cockatrice which, if placed on a chain, will
lead a band of petititioners into the hills to a deep and dark cavern that
serves as a portal to the Nine Hells. It will further lead them to the city of
Dis. Once there, they are on their own, but they’ll probably want to bring
along a few lawyers or a servant efreet to handle the negotiations.

Devil, Xaphan (Duke of Infernus)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 33
Armor Class: -7 [26]
Attacks: +4 flaming falchion (Hellstorm) (2d6 + 1d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fiery aura, fiery gaze, spells, summon devils, magic
resistance (75%), +3 magic weapons to hit, immune to fire
and charm, magical abilities, spells, regenerate 10 hp/
round,
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 38/9,800

Xaphan is 13 feet tall and resembles a satyr, with the lower torso of a
goat and the upper body of a powerful humanoid. His skin is blackishbrown and the fur on his lower torso black. Two small horns jut from his
forehead, just above his golden eyes. His hair is long and black, and he
often wears it in a braided ponytail. Two large, leathery bat-like wings
protrude from his back. Xaphan can cause his entire body to erupt in
flame, doing 2d6 points of damage to all creatures within 5 feet (no save).
In addition, any creature meeting his gaze must save or begin to burn from
the inside out, dealing 1d6 points on the 1st round, 3d6 on the 2nd, and
6d6 on the 3rd. The victim gets a save each round to negate the continuing
damage. Xaphan casts spells as a 20th-level Magic-User. At will he can
cast animate dead, create darkness (15 foot radius), cause fear, detect
magic, dispel magic, fireball, pyrotechnics, or wall of fire. Once per day
he can cast power word kill, symbol of fear and limited wish.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Falling Angels
Roiling black thunderheads fill the sky, and harsh peals of thunder roll
menacingly closer. Darkness covers the hills as the storm front arrives.
PCs caught in the storm are pelted with driving winds and torrential rain.
Jagged lightning tears at the night, the bolts of electricity sizzling in the
air as they hit close by.
But the worst is yet to come.
As the heaviest rain passes, a burning body falls from the clouds, burning
wings trailing its broken body. The angel slams hard into the muddy
dirt, its wings broken and its head twisted nearly all the way around on
its neck. The feathers of its wings are burnt and charred. Another body
falls soon afterward, then another, and another, all burning angels that
plummet like fiery meteors until they smash into the ground below.
Fighting in the clouds among the angry thunderheads are a host of
angels and the demon Xaphan, who is intent on driving the angelic host
out of the skies. PCs who jump into the fight find themselves facing off
against the Burning Duke.

Devil Dog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Frightening howl, immune to cold, throat attack
Move: 21
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

The wolf-like devil dog is larger than a wolf — about 5 feet long and
3 feet high at the shoulder. It has frost white fur that blends in almost
perfectly with its snowbound environment, becoming effectively invisible
when more than 30 feet away. Devil dogs have glowing blue eyes. When
a devil dog bays, all creatures within 30 feet with fewer HD than the devil
dog that hear it must succeed on a saving throw or become frightened for
2d6 rounds, suffering a -1 penalty to all hit rolls and saving throws. When
the devil dog's to hit roll beats its target's AC by 4 or more, the victim
suffers a throat attack. A throat attack deals double damage and stuns the
victim for 2d4 rounds if they fail a saving throw. Stunned creatures die
unless healing magic is applied before the end of the duration of the stun.

Credit: The Devil Dog originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Louis
Boschelli

Dogs on Ice
The icy stream you have been following in hopes of finding a friendly
village eventually descends into a wide cavern. Carvings around the
mouth of the cave, and just into it, suggest that it is or was inhabited.
About 200 yeards into the cavern, you discover ice covering the floor of
the cavern and made all the more slippery by the presence of the stream,
still picking its way into the cavern. As you continue to explore, the
cavern widens and the ice field grows. You eventually come across a tall
pillar of stone jutting from the ice. Geometric symbols are carved into the
post on all four sides.
As adventurers puzzle over the meaning of the symbols, they might
not notice 1d10+6 pairs of sapphire eyes surrounding them just beyond
the glow of the party's torches or lanterns. The eyes belong to a pack of
devil dogs that have cut off a village of gnomes located deeper in the
caverns. The large ice cavern with the pillar has three exits into the deeper
caverns, the symbols on the pillar denoting what lies down each tunnel.
The gnomes of the village speak in mathematical formulas, hence their
geometric “alphabet”.

Diger
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Slimy appendage (1d4 plus 1d4 acid), surprise in
water on 1-5 on 1d6
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Acid, engulf, paralysis, limited flight
Move: 3/12 (flying, swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/60

Digers are semi-transparent oozes about 9 feet in diameter that live in
abandoned ruins or underground areas where they spend most of their
time hunting for food. A large, reddish-colored gem, actually an eye,
floats near the center of the creature. A diger's gem-like eye offers it a
means to lure its prey in so it can attack. A character has a 1 in 6 (2 in 6 for
dwarves and elves) to realize the gem is not real. A diger attacks by hitting
a foe with its slimy appendage, or by simply waiting, floating unnoticed
until an opponent contacts it. A diger secretes a digestive acid that
dissolves only flesh. Any melee hit deals acid damage. Digers also secrete
an anaesthetizing slime. A creature making physical contact with a diger
must succeed on a saving throw or be paralyzed for 1d6 rounds. Digers do
not deliver this paralysis with an attack by one of their slimy appendages.
A diger can automatically engulf a paralyzed foe. An opponent remains
paralyzed for as long as it remains engulfed. A paralyzed foe is considered
to be grappled and takes 1d4 points of acid damage every 10 minutes as
the diger slowly digests it. By releasing naturally occurring helium from
its body, a diger is able to fly for 2 rounds. After that, it must land and
cannot fly again until it has rested for 2 rounds.

Credit: The Diger originally appeared in the First Edition module B3 Palace of
the Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by Jean Wells.

Medicinal Hot Springs
Proceeding from the large ice cavern (see Devil Dog lair) the tunnel
that lies straight ahead takes a sharp turn downward, becoming a brutal
ice slide for those without the proper equipment. Those attempting to
make their way down the tunnel must pass a saving throw every 20 feet
(or 5 saves in all), failure indicating they slip and fall and slide into the
next cavern. For every 20 feet an adventurer slides, he or she suffers 1d4
points of damage.
The ice slide ends in a cavern filled with steam, the ice and water
melting here due to the presence of an active hot spring. The steam is
quite thick when one first enters the cavern due to the close confines, but
as they proceed further, the cavern opens up, becoming 40 feet high and
60 feet wide. At this point, one can not only see the hot spring, surrounded
by an outcropping of large crystals, and dozens of smaller, crystal clear
pools where the steam has recondensed into water and filled hollows in
the cavern floor.
One of these pools appears to hold a large, reddish-colored gem and
is, of course, a diger. The crystals surrounding the spring are medicinal
in nature, though quite poisonous if they haven’t first been processed by
a skilled alchemist. Once properly processed, the crystals can be used to
make a bluish tincture that provides the imbiber a +2 bonus on saving
throws vs. poison for 1 hour. A pound of crystals can produce six such
tinctures.

Dire Corby
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Dire corbies are wingless bipedal crows with slick black feathers,
powerful arms that end in razor-sharp claws and a gold beaks. They
dwell deep beneath the surface world, making their homes in large, open
caverns, hollowing out individual shelters in the walls themselves. These
creatures do not possess wings now, but did in some remote part of their
past. Dire corbies are omnivores but prefer a diet of fresh meat, enjoying
the flesh of subterranean rodents, animals, and even other races. They are
particularly fond of the flesh of bats, savoring the leathery grit of their
flesh. Dire corbies speak their own language of clicks and tweets. More
intelligent dire corbies have a 10% chance of speaking Common as well.
Dire corbies hunt in flocks. They enjoy the thrill of the hunt and enjoy
running their prey down, toying with it before swooping in and tearing
it to shreds with their claws. Dire corbies always fight to the death and
never flee, even when faced with overwhelming odds.

Dire corbies as Characters Dire corby flocks are usually led by fighters. Dire
corby characters are capable of seeing in the dark as elves. Their keen
hearing assures that they never suffer penalties for fighting blind and
succeed at listening through doors and thin walls on a roll of 1-3 on 1d6.
A dire corby's feathers and thick skin give is a natural AC of 8 [11]. Their
coloration allows them to surprise foes on a roll of 1-2 on 1d6 in areas of
darkness. Dire corbies can advance to 8th level as fighters (or up to 9th
level with a strength of 14 or higher) and 4th level as thieves (or up to 5th
level with a dexterity of
16 or higher).

Credit: The Dire Corby originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jeff
Wyndham.

Flock to the Fire
The narrow tunnel the party has been following for the past 30 minutes
finally ends in what appears to be a circular cage with copper bars. The
cage contains a winch, and when turned the cage descends. The cage
descends 20 feet through solid rock before emerging into a vast cavern
shrouded in darkness. About 100 feet below the adventurers can see a
small bonfire beneath the elevator, and then several more such bonfires,
suggesting other elevators. They might also catch the dull roar of running
water; and, if their ears are sensitive enough, the sound of cackling and
movement over the sound of the water.

The cavern is inhabited by a flock of 1d6x10 dire corbies under the
leadership of a cunning corby with the ability to cast spells as a 1d2+2
level druid. The corbies dwell here in the darkness, around the shores of
a pond created by a waterfall that topples 40 feet into the cavern from a
subterranean river. The cavern, should one manage to light it, is 100 feet
tall and 500 feet in diameter and indeed contains 8 elevators and a large
idol of black stone depicting something resembling a humanoid vulture
with long arms that end in cruel hooks.

A small stone table stands before the idol, and from the bloodstains sees
occaisional use as a sacrificial altar. The water from the waterfall runs into
a completely submerged tunnel that descends much deeper into the earth.

DIRE CREATURES

Dire creatures are large, feral-looking animals. They are not just bigger
versions of normal animals, however. On the whole, dire creatures are bigger,
stronger, faster, and more aggressive than their normal counterparts.

No one is certain what causes a dire creature to be born. Some druids maintain
that Nature creates dire creatures as a direct response to some environmental
threat, or as an adaptation to the magic and monsters that share the world
with her creations. Others insist that, rather than an evolutionary step
forward, dire creatures are a regression to more savage and prehistoric days.
The majority of druids are not in the habit of questioning or explaining
Nature's motives, however, and simply state that dire creatures exist and that
is all that need be known.

Dire Bison
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: Butt (2d6)
Saving Throw: 7
Special: Stampede
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Dire bison resemble their smaller normal-sized relatives. They can grow
to a length of 20 feet and weigh up to 6,000 pounds. Humanoids often
hunt dire bison for the value of their pelts as well as the copious amounts
of meat they can provide. A single dire bison can feed a village for weeks.
A frightened herd of dire bison flees as a group in a random direction (but
always away from the perceived source of danger). They literally run over
anything smaller than they are that gets in their way, dealing 2d12 points of
damage per each 5 dire bison in the herd (saving throw for half damage).

Stampede!
The curse and promise of the prairie are the dire buffalo. Massive beasts, their
stampedes cause earth tremors and make settlement along the prairie's rivers
highly dangerous, but a single beast can feed a village for weeks and their horns
and pelts command a high price from the eastern men in their fancy cities.
It is the danger posed by the dire bison that currently interests a bitter
exile from the single market town of the prairie. A horse thief and
charlatan, he was driven into the wilderness stark naked and marked with
welts on his back and the glyph of “chaos” branded into his forehead.

Found by a band of goblin hunters, he was lucky to speak their language
fluently. With his silver tongue, he convinced them he was a prophet of
their crude gods, come to deliver them from the threat of humanity.
The charlatan's plan is simple - stampede a herd of 1d4+6 dire bison
into the defensive walls of the market town and follow it up with a goblin
invasion. To this end, he has equipped the goblin warriors with torches of
hated fire and sent them to set the prairie ablaze. The goblin shaman has
been set the task of controlling the winds, to send the dire bison toward
the town. While the goblins carry out this horendous plot, the charlatan
plans to be on his way south to more pleasant climes.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Dire Deer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Gore (1d8) or 2 hooves (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Surprise on roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A dire deer stands 6 feet at the shoulder and weighs 1,000 pounds. It has
an impressive rack of antlers up to 8 feet wide. Dire deer are hunted for
their meat as well as their tough hides. A reasonably intact dire deer hide
is worth 50 gp. Dire deer usually flee combat, but rutting males are highly
aggressive. A dire deer attacks by goring with its antlers or by rearing on
its hind legs and smacking opponents with its hooves.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Check Out Those Racks
In a fantastic lake country of green grasses and ancient, gray woodlands
there stands an old, fortified manor house, home of the Laird of the Lakes.
The Laird is an old man, a warrior who proved himself in countless
campaigns, now consigned to a cane and the ministrations of a flurry of
servants. He employs twenty men-at-arms, harsh men in ring armor with
longbows and longswords, and a court jester who spent time at the royal
court plying the trade of a poisoner.

The old laird once enjoyed taking to the hills around his castle and
hunting game, his preference being for the dire deer that stood as tall as a
man at their shoulder and had racks of antlers up to 8 feet wide. The laird's
home is decorated with many such racks. He now draws amusement from
a very different activity.

Although the laird's castle is not on the main thoroughfares of the kingdom,
he gets his share of visitors. Commoners are given a bowl of porridge and put in
the barn, but adventures are brought into the manor to sit at the laird's table and
enjoy a fine repast of venison, duck and other game meats. The next morning,
they are awakened at dawn by the laird's servants and hustled into the main
hall. There, the laird explains that they have all injested a very deadly poison,
secreted in their food. As it stands, they have a mere 12 hours to live. The
antidote is complicated, taking many days of effort to brew, but sufficient doses
can be found in the hills in golden vials tied to the antlers of a herd of 1d6+5
dire deer. If they get started, they might even find the beasts before it is too late.


Dire Dog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: None
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Dire dogs are the domestic equivalent of dire wolves. They are large, vicious
canines highly prized for their ability to track and kill opponents much
larger than themselves. Domesticated dire dogs are often trained and outfitted
for war in spiked, studded leather armor. Orcs use trained dire dogs in
warfare.

Baron Hunt
On the borders of a misty moor, one might find a tiny village and the manors
of two rival lords. Both lords hail from the same ancient family, one from the
baronial line, the other from a cadet line. Their grandfathers were cousins and
much feared in the area for their daring cattle raids, piracy and smuggling
along the nearby coast and wild behavior with women. The descendants
have turned their backs on this behavior, the new baron being devout in his
adherence to law and his cousin a well respected sage and magic-user.
The magician, however, holds a secret. The fires of his grandfather's
generation still burn brightly in his breast, and despite his advanced age he has
ambitions to usurp his cousin, the last of his line. To this end he has bargained
with the orc tribes from beyond the moor in the land of white mountains and
secured a single dire dog, a powerful creature resembling a mastiff. Securing
articles of clothing from his cousin, he has released the “demon dog” onto the
moor on successive nights to hunt for his cousin's scent. The baying of the
beast has sent a chill through the villagers (and the baron, truth be told) and
two peddlars have already been found dead and savaged by pheasant hunters.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Dire Elephant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 24
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack: Slam (3d6) and 2 stomps (3d6) or gore (3d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Trample
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 24/5600

A dire elephant is a truly tremendous animal, as large as some dinosaurs.
It stands 20 feet high at the shoulder, and weighs many tons. Its trunk is
thicker than a human's body and is 20 feet long.

A dire elephants is as intelligent as a normal elephant and can be trained
to carry a howdah almost as big as a house. Trained and outfitted for war,
a dire elephant is a nearly unstoppable dreadnaught from which warriors
can launch swarms of arrows. Some dire elephants are trained as mobile
siege engines, even to the point of having catapults and ballistae mounted
on their backs. War engineers have for centuries pondered how to use
dire elephants to pull down entire castles, but have been frustrated by the
prospects of inventing ropes strong enough for the task.

The victim of a dire elephant's trunk attack must pass a saving throw or be
grabbed and squeezed for 3d6 per round. The dire elephant can drop a creature
it has snatched for 2d6 points of falling damage or fling it aside. A flung creature
travels 1d6×10 feet, and takes 1d6 points of damage per 10 feet it traveled.
A dire elephant can inflict 3d8 points of trampling damage by moving
over the top of smaller creatures.

A light load for a dire elephant is 33,200 pounds; a medium load,
33,201-66,402 pounds; and a heavy load, 66,402-99,600 pounds. A dire
elephant can drag 498,000 pounds.

Bane of the Raj
A lone bull dire elephant has wandered into the territory of a powerful raj.
The beast threatens to trample the raj's crops and the villages of his people
if they cannot find a way to rid themselves of the beast. Alas, no champions
dwell in the land of the raj, all of them driven away by the paranoid man's
fear of a coup de’etat. The hapless peasants have tried to frighten the beast
away with horns and clashing cymbols, by releasing giant rats in front of
the beast (which resulted in the destruction of an ancient fortress and much
of its garrison) and with fire (which resulted in the loss of jujube orchard).
Still, the beast refuses to leave and the raj is beside himself with grief.
The young dire elephant was driven out of the deeper forests by a
rival, and cannot return until it is properly healed and fed and ready to
re-challenge the larger dire elephant. Speaking with the beast will elicit
this information and the creature, which is fairly reasonable, will happily
acquiesce to a plan to return him to his native country.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.


Dire Goat
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  Head butt (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Trample
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Dire goats stand 3 feet tall at the shoulder and resemble their smaller
cousins. Although they are normally wild, domesticated dire goats are not
unheard of. They are domesticated their meat as well as the amounts of
milk they can produce. Dire goats are non-aggressive unless threatened or
provoked. A dire goat rams opponents with its head, or tries to run them
over, inflicting 1d6 points of damage doing so.

Tall Tales
A hill giant maiden, attractive for her kind, tends a herd of 1d6+5
dire goats on a hill covered with wild thyme and bushes of sour, golden
berries. The girl is a dreamer, given to spinning long, exciting stories of
her ancestors and the other giant races in their heroic struggles against the
petty gods and the hordes of avaricious humans that threaten their ancient
homelands.

The maiden wears animal pelts and goes barefoot. She carries a bag of
cheese pastries, a skin of sparkling, golden berry-wine and a large stick
with a metal clapper on the end, the goats responding to the clapper. A
dire dog sits with her on that hill, sometimes harassing the goats to keep
them close and out of the berries, which have a tendency to send them
into a frenzy of kicks and bleating that can attract predators.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.


Dire Hippopotamus (Behemoth)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 13
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Bite (3d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Capsize
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

Dire hippos resemble their smaller cousins and grow up to 20 feet long
and can weigh up to 10,000 pounds.

Dire hippos gave rise to the legends of the behemoth, a massive beast that
can drink entire rivers, and make the earth tremble when it walks. Although
they can’t quite drink it all, dire hippos are the undisputed masters of the
river in which they reside. All predators give them a wide berth.
A submerged dire hippo that surfaces under a boat or ship less than
20 feet long capsizes the vessel 95% of the time. It has a 50% chance
to capsize a vessel from 20-60 feet long and a 20% chance to capsize a
vessel over 60 feet long.

A dire hippo can hold its breath for 10 minutes before it risks drowning.


Trading Rights Rescinded
The queen of the nixies was tolerant when the humans came to her
valley and established a trading post. There were not many humans, and
they provided good sport and a few handsome strangers with whom she
and her daughters and sons could pass their evenings and mingle their
blood. But over time, the trading post became a village and then a river
port, and the nixies have had enough.

Seeking the end of the river port, the queen has summoned a herd of
five behemoths. Each is now ridden by one of her daughters, with two
attacking river traffic from downriver, and three attacking river traffic
from upriver. Effectively, they have choked all traffic to the river port.

Although the lord mayor has a small fleet of galleys and almost 100
menat-arms, the behemoths have proven more than he can handle. The beasts
approach underwater and the capsize his boats, and acting in concert, they
have destroyed two small galleys already.

The queen awaits the capitulation of the humans in her river palace,
located on a tributary about eight miles away.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.


Dire Moose
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Head butt (2d6) and 2 hooves (1d8)
Saving Throw: 7
Special: Surprise on roll of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

A dire moose is over 20 feet long from nose to tail. Its rack of antlers is 18
feet across. Dire moose are hunted only by the brave, as their sheer size
and strength makes them nearly unbeatable foes. A hunter that can mount
a pair of dire moose antlers is sure to receive the praise and admiration of
his fellows. A dire moose charges with its antlers, but it can rear onto its
hind legs and batter opponents with its hooves.

Moose Tinkers
In a land of melting glaciers, rubble-stewn trenches and peat bogs,
broad woodlands of maples and birch, a clan of gnomes uses a pack of
1d8+1 dire moose in much the same way tropical folk use elephants.
The gnomes ride on the backs of these moose in wicker hoodahs, with
a family of six fitting comfortably into each hoodah. One gnome rides
on the moose's neck, directing it with vocal commands and rewarding it
with maple candies delivered in a basket tied to a long stick. The gnomes
arm themselves with short bows and long spears, and though they prefer
not to put their mounts into dangerous situations, will make use of their
devastating charges in dire situations.
The gnomes work as itinerant tinkers and traders, their caravan of dire
moose traversing the primitive human villages that are following the
retreating glaciers back into the north. The humans work as hunters and
fishermen, and trade pelts, dried meat and bones for the metal and wicker
goods of the gnomes. The gnomes also entertain them with stories and
illusions and provide a means for one chief to communicate with another
without the necessity of meeting face-to-face.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.


Dire Porcupine
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: 1d6 quills (1d4) and bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Quills
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

The dire porcupine ranges in size from 3 to 4 feet in height and can
weigh up to 80 pounds. When the porcupine is relaxed, the hair and quills
lie flat and point toward the rear of its body. When threatened, it draws up
the skin of the back to expose quills facing all directions.

Dire porcupines are passive until threatened. When faced with possible
combat, the dire porcupine raises the quills on its body and spins around,
smashing an opponent with its quill-covered tail. If it bites an opponent,
1d4 quills break off from its body and lodge in the opponent.

When the dire porcupine strikes with its tail, it dislodges 1d6 quills that
automatically break off and lodge in the opponent's flesh. A lodged quill
imposes a -1 circumstance penalty to attacks and saving throws. Each 1
minute thereafter, the quill moves deeper into the opponent's flesh, dealing
1d3 additional points of damage. Removing the quill takes 1 round and
deals 1d4 additional points of damage. If the quill has been embedded for
more than 2 rounds, an open doors check is needed to remove the quill.
An unarmed or melee touch attack against a dire porcupine causes 1d4
quills to break off and lodge in the attacker.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Saltpeter
In a comfortable tavern of craftsmen and a few men-at-arms, three men
- thin, with the look of scholars about them - are speaking all at once in
agitated voices, throwing their arms about and demanding quick action
of a man in chainmail armor with a drooping mustache and tired eyes.
The man is doing his best to quiet the men and get some sense out of
them. The patrons are gathered about with their mugs of ale and enjoying
the spectacle, some joining in the demonstrations of the scholars, others
“helping” the armored man.

When some semblance of order is restored, the armored man will be
revealed to be the local shire reeve and the scholars a trio of alchemists.
They are complaining about the fact that 1d4+1 dire porcupines has
invaded their operation in search of salt. In particular, they have
surrounded great, 20-foot long heap of straw soaked with urine and
covered with burlap taps. The heap is used to produce saltpeter, and it is
ready to be harvested. This has thrown the excitable alchemists (too much
mercury, don’t you know) into a tizzy, and the shire reeve is taking the
brunt of it since he's significantly less dangerous than the dire porcupine.

Dire Ram
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Butt (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Ferocity
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Dire rams are larger, meaner cousins of normal rams. They can grow to
a length of 10 feet and weigh as much as 1,000 pounds. Dire rams are the
majestic lords of their domain, and tolerate not incursion by predators.
A dire ram is such a tenacious combatant that it continues to fight
without penalty for 1d4 rounds after its hp are reduced to 0.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Between a Roc and a Ram's Place
Situated at the peak of a mountain is the nest of a black-feathered roc.
The roc's nest currently holds the body of the princess royal, plucked
from the deck of her pleasure barge and carried to the nest to feed its
young. The feeding has already occurred, and the princess is far beyond
saving, but her jewels remain in the nest ready to be plucked by a band
of enterprising adventurers. The nest currently holds three fledglings and
approximately 5,000 gp worth of jewels.
If the mother roc and her babies (they attack as clubnecks, see that
entry in this book) weren’t dangerous enough, the slopes of the mountain
that holds their nest are inhabited by a dire ram and his harem of eight
females. The ram controls the lower slopes of the mountain and does not
take kindly to intruders.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Dire Skunk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Musk
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

A dire skunk is 3 feet long, with a tail that rises 2 feet into the air. When
aroused, it stamps it forefeet and hisses. A dire skunk gives its opponents
every opportunity to back down and leave the area. If it is not left alone,
a dire skunk rises onto its forelegs and sprays its musk. A dire skunk bites
an opponent not driven away by the odor.

Once per round, and no more than 5 times per day, a dire skunk can
release a cloud of stinking musk that quickly fills a 5-foot area in front of
it. A creature within or entering the area must succeed on a saving throw
or be sickened for 1d4 rounds. One round later a second save must be
made (whether the first one succeeded or not) or the affected creature is
blinded for 1d4 rounds. A neutralize poison spell removes the effect from
the sickened creature, but does not remove the blindness.

The stench is highly potent, and short of magical means of cleaning,
all cloth and such material continue to reek for 1d6 months. The odor is
so strong that it doubles all chances for wandering monster encounters
and imposes a -50% penalty on an assassin or thief's ability to hide in
shadows while wearing clothing contaminated with a skunk's musk.
Flesh, leather goods, and metal goods (weapons, armor, and so on) must
be washed in a concentrated mixture of vinegar for a period of 1d3 days.
Otherwise, the stench clings to them for at least 1 week.

Territorial Disputes
While traversing a river valley, one might come upon a camp
of dwarves. The dwarves are in a foul humor for they have been driven from the
gold mine in the surrounding hills by a family of 1d6+3 dire skunks.  The
skunks were driven from their old home in the woodlands by the action of the
miners, who felled trees for use in constructing their mine and setting the
fires that crack the rock, allowing them to extract ore.  The dwarves are
twelve in number and they are hungry and miserable.  They are miners, not
hunters or warriors, and they’re now cut off from their supplies in the mine.
They are a shifty lot, and though they will promise the moon to be rid of the
dire skunks, they may not deliver.  Worse yet, they will leave out the problem
of the kobolds that live deeper in the mine and the green slime that claimed
Udolf.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Dire Sloth
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Rend with claws, move or attack each round, surprise on roll of 1-2 on 1d6 in wooded environment
Move: 6/12 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Dire sloths grow up to be 7 feet long and weigh up to 250 pounds. The
fur of a dire sloth is stained green by algae. A dire sloth that hits with both
claw attacks latches onto the opponent's body and tears the flesh for an
additional 1d4 points of damage.

Sacrifices to the Green Gods
A copse of giant cecropias serves as the lair of a pair of dire sloths. The
sloths are called the “Green Gods of the Tree Tops” by the natives of the
area, who leave offerings of fruits to them regularly. The natives dwell
about 4 miles away from the sacred copse in a large, riverside village of
woven huts. Although not terribly aggressive, they fear outsiders. Armed
with spears, blowguns and poisoned darts (sleep), the warriors of the
tribe do their best to capture invaders, ambushing them from the trees.
Captives are taken to the sacred copse. Vines are tied around their hands,
legs and chest, and they are lifted into the tree tops as an offering to the
“Green Gods”. The natives return in three days. If the captives are still
alive, they are lowered and welcomed into the village, being adopted by
the chief and made his sons and daughters. Otherwise, their bodies are cut
down and thrown into the river to feed its monstrous hunger.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Disenchanter
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Snout (disenchantment) or 2 hooves (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Disenchant, +1 or better weapon to hit
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Disenchanters look like massive, blue furred camels with slightly
translucent skin and long snouts that ends somethin akin to a suction cup.
The disenchanter is greatly feared for the damage it can cause. Much like
a rust monster, it feeds on objects most adventurers hold near and dear
to their hearts—magic items. A typical disenchanter is about 8 feet long
and weighs 600 pounds. A disenchanter targets magical items carried or
worn by an opponent. A disenchanter is able to discern the most powerful
magical items in a group and always attack those items first, unless those
items are too difficult to reach (such as hidden in a backpack), in which
case the disenchanter will choose to attack a more readily available item
(such as a magical shield). It fastens its snout onto an item and drains the
item's magical properties unless its owner passes a saving throw. The
item hit is determined randomly by the Referee. If the disenchanter aims
for a specific item, it suffers a -6 penalty to hit. Magical weapons are not
drained of their magical properties if they merely strike a disenchanter the weapon must be struck by the creature's snout to be drained.

An Adventurer's Worst Nightmare
Via an iron door you enter a corridor about 35 feet long with a door on
each end, the door to the left being painted with the image of a magicuser, the door to the right bearing the image of an armored knight. Both
images have their facial features twisted in looks of abject terror. You
enter the corridor at its center, the iron door sealing tightly behind you.
Walking more than 10 feet in either direction down the corridor causes
the corridor to tilt (unless balanced by an equal weight down the other
side of the corridor).
The doors bearing the magic-user and fighter spin on a horizontal
access. If the corridor is not tilted, the doors will not move, having stone
walls behind them. Otherwise, they grant access to level (i.e. not tilted)
chambers 20 feet by 20 feet in size. The corridor does not “un-tilt” when
a chamber is entered, latching tightly and not unlatching until people have
climbed the slope to the middle of the corridor, at which point it rights
itself.
The chamber of the fighter contains 1d4 rust monsters, while the chamber
of the magic-user contains a pair of disenchanters. Both chambers contain
a large wooden wheel which must be turned so that blue arrows align
with one another to unlatch the iron door through which the adventurers
entered the tilting corridor.

Credit: The Disenchanter originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Roger
Musson.

Dracolisk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6), bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Breath weapon, petrifying gaze
Move: 12/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2600

This creature resembles a young six-legged dragon with glistening
scales and gleaming eyes.

The vicious dracolisk is a rare crossbreed of dragon and basilisk.
A dracolisk has a scaled body the same color as its dragon parent that fades
to a lighter shade on its underside. A short, curved horn, similar to
a rhino's, juts from its nose. Like the basilisk, it has six legs. Its
dragonlike wings match its body color but fade to a slightly darker shade near
the tips. A dracolisk's eyes are pale green with sparkles that match its
dragon-parent color. Dracolisks speak a crude and broken form of the language
of their dragon parent. Black dracolisks can be found in warm marshes,
deserts, or underground; blue dracolisks favor warm hills and mountains,
rarely being found underground; green dracolisks favor temperate or warm
forests and underground settings; red dracolisks favor warm mountains and
underground settings; and white dracolisks favor cold mountains, cold deserts,
and underground. A dracolisk has the breath weapon of its parent. It can use
its breath weapon three times per day, inflicting 4d8 points of damage with
it.

=========== ====================================================================
Variety     Breath Weapon
=========== ====================================================================
Black       60-foot line of acid
Blue        60-foot line of electricity
Green       30-foot cone of acidic gas
Red         30-foot cone of fire
White       30-foot cone of cold
=========== ====================================================================

Like the basilisk, the dracolisk's gaze turns people to stone. The gaze
has a range of 30 feet, and potential victims receive a saving throw to
avoid the gaze.

Credit: The Dracolisk originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax

The Hubris of Youth
A chill mountain pass that links the young kingdom with the old is
rarely used these days due to the presence of a reptilian horror with
alabaster scales and leering, green eyes as big as saucers. The beast is
a white dracolisk, a young, rambunctious specimen who has recently
fled his mother's lair deeper in the earth with a small portion of treasure.
While the white dracolisk has held his new cave lair, he has managed
to devour two peddlers, stealing their wares (a dozen copper pots worth
about 5 gp and a large keg of fortified wine worth about 20 gp), which
make up its entire treasure.

Draconid
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 bites (2d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, poison, web, resists fire
Move: 9/3 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

A draconid appears as a giant spider with eight spindly legs. Where its
head should be, two long serpentine necks sprout from its body. Atop
each neck sits a dragon-like head. A draconid's spidery body is grayishblack and covered in short, coarse fur. Its heads and necks are scaled gray
and fade to a grayish-black as they near the body. Each draconid head can
breathe a jet of fire once every 1d4 rounds in a line 10 feet wide, 10 feet
high and 30 feet long. Each jet deals 3d6 points of damage (save for half).
A draconid's bite delivers a toxic poison. Draconids can throw a web up
to six times per day up to 50 feet that is similar to a web spell.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Whack-a-Draconid
A 20-foot-wide limestone corridor is filled with odd calcite formations
that appear to be crude statues and carvings worked out of the walls by an
insane sculptor. Curling obstacles hinder movement, but don’t completely
block the corridor. These karst formations are natural creations formed by
water droplets falling from the ceiling to erode the stone into fantastic
shapes. The floor is pitted with hundreds of indentations from the dripping
water. The corridor is 90 feet long, with the ceiling rising between 15 and
20 feet high.
About halfway down the natural corridor, the ceiling is pocked by eight
wide circular openings. Looking through the holes, a second ceiling rises
about eight feet above the lower ceiling, like an attic in a home. This
second tunnel is dark and filled with more rock protrusions. This second
corridor twists and turns and eventually rises to the surface.
A draconid roams this second tunnel, walking upside down on the
ceiling to avoid the rock karsts. In the darkness, the draconid's strange
shape and coloration make it appear to be another rock outcropping.
The draconid waits for creatures to pass beneath it, then sticks its two
dragon heads through the limestone holes to attack PCs in lower corridor.
The heads are long enough that they can reach PCs cowering on the floor.
The draconid breathes fire at every opportunity. PCs fleeing through the
sharp rock outcroppings take 1d6 points of damage (save avoids).

Dragon, Cloud
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12-14
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8), bite (3d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Cloud form, breath weapon, spells
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12 HD (14/2600), 13 HD (15/2900), 14 HD (16/3200)

Cloud dragons are the most reclusive of all dragons, rarely leaving the
safety and sanctity of their cloudy lairs. They have fringed and frilled
heads and wings that sweep back from shoulders to tail. Large, piercing
rose colored eyes dominate their somewhat triangular heads. A cloud
dragon wyrmling's scales are silvery-blue with a slight hint of red at
the tip of each scale. As the dragon ages, its color slowly changes to a
bright sunset orange. The oldest cloud dragons resemble gold dragons,
save for the large bony plates on their heads and backs. Their tails trail
off becoming misty and translucent near the tip. Cloud dragons have a
great disdain for non-flying creatures and creatures that must use nonnatural means to fly. Cloud dragons are not highly aggressive, but dislike
interlopers and attack them on sight.
A cloud dragon has one type of breath weapon, a cone of icy cold
air. Creatures smaller than the cloud dragon must succeed on a saving
throw or be knocked down and blown back 2d12 feet plus 3 feet per age
category of the cloud dragon. A creature takes 1d4 points of damage per
10 feet it is blown back. Flying creatures are buffeted and blown back
twice the distance and sustain 2d6 points of damage per 10 feet.
The cloud dragon can assume a cloudy form and remain in this form
indefinitely. While in cloud form, it can still use spells but cannot use
its breath weapon or make physical attacks. This ability is otherwise
identical to the gaseous form spell.
Twice per day, an adult or older cloud dragon can create a maximum of
81 cubic feet of water as per the create water spell, the water falling from
the sky in the form of rain. In addition, it can cast the following spells:
Call lightning (2/day), control weather (2/day), obscuring mist (3/day)
and stinking cloud (2/day).

Credit: The Cloud Dragon originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Head in the Clouds
A good millennia ago, an archimage spent many years ensorcelling
dozens of glass spheres with permanent levitation spells. These orbs were
used to fill the hold of a large treasure junk, its bow carved in the shape of
a grimacing gold dragon and its timbers flecked with gold paint. Through
the use of these orbs, a dozen large casks and a wand that allowed him to
create water, the archimage had a (barely) functional flying ship. Taken
with his own genius, he gathered his apprentices, friends and retainers
and took the ship up for its maiden voyage. Having never been to so great
a height, the poor archimage did not realize how powerful the wind can
become in the upper atmosphere, and he and his crew were blown clean
off the deck.
The ship still floats in the upper atmosphere, slightly beaten and
battered, its lateen rigging in shreds. It serves as the lair of 1d3 cloud
dragons, the kegs now holding their treasure and the ship slowly being
dragged closer to the earth and, therefore, closer to the path of a range of
jagged peaks. From these peaks, on certain days of the year, one can make
out the ghostly ship emerging from the clouds, promising adventure to
any who can find a way to reach it.

Dragon, Dungeon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8-10
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6) and bite (3d6)
Saving Throw: 8, 6 or 5
Special: Spits confusion mist
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8 HD (10/1,400), 9 HD (11/1,700), 10 HD (12/2,000)

The dungeon dragon is a rare dragon race that delights in building
intricate underground dungeons and mazes in which to ensnare wouldbe-delvers. A dungeon dragon is approximately 15 feet long, with a long
serpentine neck, small atrophied wings, and glistening scales. Two small
horns dominate its triangular head. Its body is gray in color, with scales
tipped in flecks of gold and green. Its eyes are rounded and gold or gray. A
dungeon dragon spits a blast of warm mist in a 100-foot line or a 50-foot
cone that causes confusion.

The Maze of Mystery
A boarded-up one-story building sits against the hillside. A oncecolorful sign
hanging from the roof proclaims it to be the Mind-Boggling Maze of Mystery.
A board near the door has been pried open and a gold coin sits just inside
dilapidated structure on the wooden floor. The gold coin is glued to the
floor, and trying to pry it up causes the floor to slant and drop PCs into
a cavernous rock maze beneath the building.  The maze is built into the
hillside behind and below the abandoned roadside attraction, and covers more
than a square mile of twisting underground tunnels filled with pit traps,
swinging scythe blades and dense spider webs. Heavy fake doors fall out of
their hinges on PCs (1d6 damage to those who fail a save to get out of the
way) and fountain nozzles shoot jets of acid out of holes hidden behind
colorful murals of clowns.

The torture chamber maze is the creation of a dungeon dragon living in a stone
cavern sealed off from the maze. Daedalintus the Twisted captures living
creatures and dumps them into his maze for his personal delight.  The demented
little dragon uses a crystal ball to watch the fun as his playthings meet
gruesome ends in his diabolical trap and while facing off against one another.
Besides PCs, residents of the maze include six minotaurs with white skulls
painted on the black fur of their faces, a pair of mated ahlinni with their
clipped wings to keep them from flying away, four ghost-faced orcs with clown
features added to their angry features and 2 leucrotta.

MINOTAUR (6): HD 6+4; hp 41; AC 6 [13]; Atk Head butt
(2d4), bite (1d3) and weapon (1d8); Move 12; Save 11;
CL/XP 6/400; Alignment: Chaos; Special: Never get lost in
labyrinths

LEUCROTA (2): HD 6; AC 4[15]; Atk 1 bite (3d6); Move 18;
Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: None.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Dragon, Faerie
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Breath weapon, spells, invisibility, magic resistance
(10%), telepathy (2 miles)
Move: 9/36 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The faerie dragon is a tiny beast with delicate and brightly colored
butterfly wings and a long, thin prehensile tail. Its scales are smooth
and range in color from red to purple, with all colors of the spectrum
falling in between. Its eyes are bluish-green, and its backward curving
horns are silver with gold flecks. Faerie dragons are fey members of the
dragon family and are believed to be distant cousins of the pseudodragon.
Female faerie dragons have a golden sheen to their coloring while males
have a silver sheen. Faerie dragons love to play pranks on passersby and
employ their spells to this end. Some faerie dragons spend months on end
preparing for the day they can unleash their single grand practical joke
or prank. Faerie dragons avoid combat and only attack if cornered or if
their lair or young are in immediate danger. A faerie dragon attacks with
its breath weapon, spells, and bite.
The faerie dragon's breath weapon is a cone 5 feet long and 5 feet wide
at the base. Those within the cone must pass a saving throw or or wander
aimlessly in a state of euphoric bliss for 2d6 rounds (similar to a confusion
effect). The faerie dragon can emit its breath weapon three times per day.
A faerie dragon can replicate magic-user (65% chance) or druid spells
(35% chance) as a 4th level spell caster. A faerie dragon can become
invisible at will and remain invisible even while attacking. This effect
can be dispelled, but the faerie dragon can create it again on its next turn.

Credit: The Faerie Dragon originally appeared in Dragon #62 (© TSR/Wizards of
the Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Brian
Jaeger and Gary Gygax.

All Fun and Games Until Someone Gets Hurt
The House at the Edge of the Wood has been serving travelers on their
way into and out of the sylvan valley for almost a century. The road house
was once the fortified abbey of a chaotic and thoroughly repugnant order
of clerics, long since put the sword by a band of tender adventurers. Much
of the abbey was lost to a fire, the burnt out bits now reconstructed with
timber taken from the nearby woodlands. The roadhouse provides stables,
a large, comfortable great room (with tours of the old torture chamber in
the cellar available for a silver piece, or for free for those who don’t pay
their check). The rooms are rather small, with clay pipes running through
them from the hearth in the great room to provide a bit of heat and
furnished with copper pots and feather mattresses atop straw pallettes.
The crowd at the House usually consists of a dozen or so travelers
- merchants, pilgrims, adventurers, etc - in high spirits, their sore feet
soaking in tubs of hot water, a mug of ale in their mitts. Of late, the
place has fallen under a melancholy, for it is said that the restless spirits
of the souls once tormented in the cellar have returned. Strange sights
and sounds have been occuring in the place, and though none have died,
none have waited about for the worst to happen. The roadhouse has fallen
on hard times and the servants are especially eager to please their only
guests. The trouble is being caused by a trio of faerie dragons who have
taken up residence in the cellar. The beasts will stay as long as their are
amusements to be had.

Dragon, Mist
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9-11
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6), bite (2d10)
Saving Throw: 6/5/4
Special: Gaseous form, breath weapon, spells
Move: 9/30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9 HD (14/2600), 10 HD (15/2900), 11 HD (16/3200)

Mist dragons are relatively passive and reclusive, preferring to spend
their time away from most other folk, including other mist dragons. Mist
dragons make their lairs near large sources of water such as waterfalls,
lakes, and seashores. A mist dragon resembles a gold dragon in shape and
size. Its scales are shiny-blue white as a hatchling and gradually darken
to a blue-gray color with metallic silver splotches. It possesses no visible
wings.

A mist dragon can breathe a cloud of scalding vapor 20 feet in diameter
up to three times per day. In still air, the vapor lingers for 1d4 rounds; on
the second round, the vapor condenses into a heated smothering fog that
deals 2d6 points of damage to creatures each round they remain in the
area (saving throw for half damage) and additionally causes blindness (as
the spell) as long as they remain within in the cloud and for 1d4+2 rounds
after they leave the area.

A mist dragon can assume a mist form at will. This ability is as the
gaseous form spell, but the mist dragon can remain in its mist form
indefinitely and has a fly speed of 21 with perfect maneuverability. The
mist dragon can use its spells in mist form, but not its physical attacks or
breath weapon.

Twice per day, an adult or older mist dragon can create a maximum of
81 cubic feet of water as per the create water spell. It can also cast the
following spells: Control winds (3/day), lower water (2/day), obscuring
mist (2/day) and part water (2/day)

Mist dragons can breathe underwater indefinitely and can freely use
their breath weapon, spells, and other abilities while submerged.

Credit: The Mist Dragon originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.

Mist School
Overlooking the pounding surf, from the warmth of a deep, dark cave,
a clan of 1d4+1 mist dragons awaits the approach of their students. The
mist dragons have for generations served as the mentors of a clan of
assassins. The cave lair contains dozens of censors in which burn cones of
pleasant incense that fill the chamber with burgundy smoke. The entrance
tunnel leads back about forty feet and contains three separate trip wires
that trigger poisoned darts - the stock in trade of the assassins. The tunnel
leads to a large cavern that contains a pool of sea water that connects to
the sea. A ledge overlooking this pool leads to another cavern, wherein
dwell the mist dragons, surrounded by the treasure they have collected
from their students.

On any given day, there is a 1 in 10 chance that 1d4+2 of the assassins
are present to sit at the feet of the dragons and benefit from their wisdom.
They instruct their students in the art of stealth and the power of patience
and perseverance, the latter lesson being taught through the use of a
curious chatrang board consisting of three levels, one atop the other.

Dragon, Smoke
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3-5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4) and bite (2d8)
Saving Throw: 14, 13 or 12
Special: Spits smoke
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3 HD (3/60), 4 HD (4/120), 5 HD (5/240)

Smoke dragons are small, 3-foot long, black dragons with grayish
underbellies and are often mistaken for immature black dragons because
of their dark colored scales. Smoke dragons have smoke-gray talons and
red-tinged wings. Their eyes are gray or, in some rare instances, blue.
Small under-curved horns protrude from their heads and their serpentine
tails are about 5 feet long. Smoke dragons spit a cone of smoke up to 20
feet that causes opponents to choke and cough (save avoids). Once per
day, a smoke dragon can assume a smoky form (similar to gaseous form).

Fire in the Sky
A waterfall's deep rumble in the underground network of caverns
thrums across a shallow lake filling this 60-foot-diameter grotto. Ripples
bounce across the surface of the water with each bass thump of falling
water that echoes through the darkness. A 10-foot-wide underground river
opens under the lake, forcing PCs to swim a 60-foot-waterfilled tunnel to
surface in the center of the room. A pall of black smoke drifts over the
water, the vapor wafting throughout this chamber. The stone ceiling is 15
feet overhead, and a rocky 5-foot-wide path runs around one side of the
lake. The bottom of a brick-lined chimney cuts a square hole in the center
of the ceiling. This chimney cuts through 400 feet of rock and dirt and
opens in the middle of a surface lake. Iron rungs set into one side of the
brick chimney go all the way to the surface. Purple mushrooms provide a
soft phosphorescent light in the underground cavern. The room smells of
sulfur and rotten eggs.
Two wings of 2d4+2 smoke dragons live in small caves just above the
waterline of the underground lake. It's mating season for these dragons,
and the males are fighting for the affection of the females (which are also
vying to be with the top males). Half of the dragons encountered are male.
The smoky blasts of the dragons’ breath float about the room like small
clouds, causing PCs to choke and cough. The dragons enter and leave the
grotto through the chimney.
The purple mushrooms are a rare species that emit a flammable gas.
This gas floats along the ceiling and fills the brick-lined chimney. The gas
ignites in a fireball if a flame is lighted in the room. The flash fire does 5d6
points of damage (save for half). The smoke dragons dart into the caves to
avoid the flames that roil along the upper part of the room. The fire erupts
up the chimney as a column of fire that rises nearly 75 feet above the land
above. There's a 2 in 6 chance that the column attracts the attention of
nearby flying creatures, including griffons, sabrewings and dragons. It
takes a full month for the gas to build up again. The smoke dragons pour
out of their holes to finish off anyone who disturbed their courtship.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Dragon, Wrath
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10-12
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (2d12)
Saving Throw: 5, 4, or 3
Special: Breathes holy fire, turn undead
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 10 HD (12/2,000), 11 HD (13/2,300), 12 HD (14/2,600)

A wrath dragon is 30 feet long and weighs about 30,000 pounds. It has
a serpentine neck and glittering silver scales. They breathe holy fire in
a cone-shape 90 feet long and roughly 30 feet wide at the base. Wrath
dragons have 75% chance of being able to talk; talking wrath dragons
have a 50% chance of being able to cast spells as a 6th-level Cleric. They
can turn undead as an 8th-level Cleric.

Devotion
The forest long ago reclaimed a lost civilization that
flourished hundreds of years ago in this area. Only the
foundations and vague outlines of city streets remain.
The one link to the past that has withstood the test of
time and the harsh elements is a sprawling cemetery
surrounded by a low stone wall topped with cast-iron
fence. A marble entry arch enclosing an iron gate
has the name of the cemetery written on it in an
ancient common tongue: “Devotion.” More a
mystical garden than a cemetery, Devotion has
working fountains, fantastic monuments and
ornate mausoleums. Even to casual observers,
the area seems too idyllic and serene. Visitors
have a strong sense of being watched on the
pristine grounds that have defied the ravages
of time. Flocks of docile sheep and goats
keep the grounds naturally maintained.
Untold treasures of ancients lie undisturbed
within the forgotten tombs.
A pact with a long-departed king keeps a
wrath dragon within the compound as an
eternal guuardian for the burial grounds.
The dragon, who has adopted the name
“Devotion,” slumbers within a reflecting pool
in the middle of the graveyard. It watches over the dead and dines on the
protected flock when needed. Tomb raiders who try to steal from the dead
invoke the dragon's wrath, and it fully lives up to its species odd name.
Recently, a coven of hags and their minions secretly burrowed into the
cemetery and defiled a number of tombs and looted the dead. They stole
jewels and magic trinkets, and even made off with the entombed bodies
of the ancient dead. The dragon desperately needs the stolen items and
mummies returned. It may reward righteous adventures with a choice of
items from its private hoard.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Dragon Horse
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  2 hooves (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Breath weapon, keen vision, limited empathy,
magic resistance (30%), never surprised, sense alignment
Move: 30/60 (flying)
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

This creature resembles a horse with a smooth coat of scintillating blue
hues that seem to flicker and wash over its body in waves as it gallops
through the air. Its deep sky blue hooves do not touch the ground as it
moves. The mane and tail of a dragon horse is of purest white and flows
out behind it in an elegant cascade. The name “dragon horse” is something
of a misnomer, as these creatures have no relation to true dragons. They
are, in fact, more closely related to the noble ki-rin. Dragon horses are
creatures originally from the Elemental Plane of Air that have decided,
for reasons unknown to anyone but themselves, to reside more or less
permanently in the Material Plane. Dragon horses visit the Elemental
Plane of Air frequently, however.

Dragon horses are solitary creatures, but a mated pair will often remain
together to raise their young. They have no need or desire for material
possessions and so keep no treasure. Dragon horses are highly prized as
steeds, but they are notoriously difficult to train. They have a very free
spirit and do not tolerate captivity, thus only juvenile dragon horses have
any chance of being tamed mounts. A captive foal can be raised only by a
lawful being and doing so requires 10 years and a significant investment
of time.

Three times per day, a dragon horse can create one of the following
effects in a 30-foot cone: cone of cold (8 dice), obscuring mist or gust
of wind capable of knocking weak or small creatures down if they fail a
saving throw, a imposing a -5 penalty to ranged attacks while it continues.
A dragon horse can enter the Ethereal Plane, Astral Plane, Elemental
Plane of Air, or the Material Plane. This ability transports the dragon
horse and up to two other creatures, provided they are on its back.

Credit: The Dragon Horse originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Free Ride
The parlor of the silk merchant has long been renowned not for the rich
curtains of damask or the thick crimson rugs across which the light feet of
shaven slaves scurry back and forth with silver trays of exotic delicacies,
but rather for the curious chandelier that hangs from the ceiling.
Captured, the merchant claims, from a sacked mountain temple and
given to him by the duke of a far away land with a nonsensical rhyming
name, the chandelier consists of three bluish orbs hanging from golden
chains attached to an ornately carved triangle of black wood connected
to the ceiling by an iron chain. The orbs fill the room with a soft, silvery
light that becomes noticeably stronger and more coppery whenever the
merchant enters the room. Folk who are sensitive to such things may
notice a disturbance in the aether whenever they are in the room, a
disturbance that, they will discover with some concentration, has a voice
- a weak voice, to be sure, but one that repeats the word “Freedom” over
and over again with a desperation and longing that will melt hearts neutral
and lawful alike (but not chaotics, the miserable bastards).
The presence of any elemental air magic in the room will focus itself
upon the chandelier to the exclusion of all other targets, though such
magic cannot harm the chandelier, which contains within the orbs three
dragon horses. The horses can be freed by shattering the orbs, which have
an AC of 4 [15] and can suffer 20 points of damage before they break.
Once freed, the dragon horses will swiftly make their way from the home
of the silk merchant, stopping only to dent his skull with their hooves and
offer their rescuers a free ride.

Giant Dragonfly
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: None
Move: 9/30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Giant dragonflies appear as normal dragonflies about 5 feet long. Their
skin glitters in the sunlight and, if it can be removed and preserved, brings
a very good price on the market. Giant dragonflies are dangerous predators
and hunt humans and other humanoids as prey. A giant dragonfly is very
aggressive and hunts warm-blooded creatures fearlessly. It attacks until
either it or its prey is dead.

Credit: The Giant Dragonfly originally appeared the First Edition module EX2
The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and
is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Fly, My Pretties, Fly!
A battered stone tower rises from the midst of the swamp, its tumbling
stones covered in swamp creepers and patches of green slime. The lower
floor of the tower is empty save for a rusty iron ladder. The ladder leads to
the lair of a hermit-like ogre mage. Despite the ramshackle appearance of
the tower, the ogre mage live in luxury - thick, patterened rugs, tapestries
containing gold and silver threads, beautiful (though slightly warped)
furniture upholstered in velvet, etc. The walls of the ogre mage's chamber
are lined with wooden cages containing 2d6 dazzlingly beautiful giant
dragonflies. The ogre mage hunts with them as humans hunt with falcons.
He carries a tin whistle covered in blue lacquer that allows him to control
(to a very limited degree) the dragonflies. Should intruders enter his
abode, the ogre mage will first attempt to release his pets.

Dragonnel
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8), bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: None
Move: 15/30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality (with chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Dragonnels are believed to be either related to dragons or an abominal
crossbreed of dragon and pteranodon, as they share the physical
characteristics of both those monsters. Dragonnels are semi-intelligent
and use this ability to their advantage when hunting or stalking prey.
Dragonnels are fierce hunters, though some have been trained by evil
humanoids as mounts and guardians. A typical dragonnel is about 25 feet
long. It is thought that dragonnels speak or at least understand Common.
A solitary dragonnel is usually either hunting or returning to its lair from
hunting, while more than one dragonnel usually indicates a mated pair or
family. In such a case, all dragonnels attack in concert with one another
and usually fight to the death.
A dragonnel requires training before it can bear a rider in combat. To
be trained, a dragonnel must have a friendly attitude toward the trainer.
Training a friendly dragonnel requires six weeks of work by an animal
trainer. Riding a dragonnel requires an exotic saddle. A dragonnel can
fight while carrying a rider, but the rider cannot also attack unless he or
she succeeds on a saving throw. Dragonnels can carry up to 1,000 pounds
without reducing their movement rate, up to 2,000 pounds at half their
movement rate and 3,000 pounds at a third of their movement rate.
Dragonnel eggs are worth 4,500 gp apiece on the open market, while
young are worth 9,000 gp each. Professional trainers charge 1,500 gp to
rear or train a dragonnel.

Credit: The Dragonnel originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

The Maidens of Devi's Roost
The Devi's Roost is a tall mountain, its peak obscured by clouds and its
lower slopes covered by a thick tangle of coffee bushes. The bushes are
harvested by a timid population of halflings, fearful of the terrible beasts
who live above the clouds and their fierce mistresses. The upper reaches
of the Devi's Roost are inhabited by a small band of women, maidens
all if the stories are true. The maidens ride dragonnels, using them to
dive down and snatch up trespassers on the lower slopes of the mountain.
Those so snatched are never heard from again.
The maidens dwell in a series of caverns, stacked one atop another,
accessible from a large cave entrance high atop the mountain. The
upper cave is a simple guard post. Below it is a much larger cavern that
serves as a home to 1d4+4 dragonnels, usually tended by two or three
halfling slaves. The deeper caverns hold living quarters for the maidens,
tall women with ebon skin and golden hair, and deeper still the great
vats from which they are born. In all, there are twenty of these vat-born
beauties, who are completely devoid of emotion and seem to live solely
to create sisters, the primary ingredients being the bodily humors of
captured halflings not kept as servants.

Dragonship
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 4 slams (2d6+2) and 1 bite (1d8+2)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, vulnerable to fire, winds, immune
to magic
Move: 18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 23/5300

A dragonship is an animated sailing vessel—essentially a massive wood
golem in the form of a longship. It is identical to a longship in every way
except that it is only 20 feet long. It has a standard square-rigged sail,
and 10 oars (5 on each side). The front of the ship sports a great wooden
dragon-like figurehead. It has a near perfect knowledge of local sea charts
and navigation routes. It can be told a destination and it will sail there by
the quickest route possible. As a sailing vessel a dragonship has a crew of
30 and can carry up to 35 tons of cargo. At will, a dragonship can cause
winds to fill its sails to carry it along. Three times a day, a dragonship can
breathe a line of fire up to 30 feet that does 8d6 points of damage (save for
half). A dragonship is vulnerable to fire, and takes one-and-a-half times
damage from fire-based spells. No other magic harms a dragonship.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Raiders in the Storm
A wide underground river flows through a broad natural cavern beneath
the treacherous Sabergnaw Peaks. The water is clear and cold, filled with
trout and catfish. The waterway runs for four miles underground. The roof
looms 300 feet overhead, with jagged spikes of stone reaching downward.
A band of vicious raiders called the Devourers of the Dead live in a side
branch of the massive tunnel. These burly warriors eat the dead, and steal
women and children from the surrounding mountain villages to work in
their underground camp. The marauders sail a dragonship along the river
and use it on their scavenging raids. A particularly vile fighter named
Kreskinarl leads the raucous band. He is a beefy man with a grimy red
beard who takes what he wants. He carries a large double-bladed axe
notched with numerous nicks. He wears a metal helm with two large
horns that sweep down around his face.
The Devourers live in a group of dirty wood-and-stone buildings set
into the cavernous tunnel. A rickety wooden dock extends over the black
water, and the dragonship moors itself beside it, always ready to sail –
sometimes on its own if it feels the need.
The marauders keep a druid named Jendle tied to the dragonship's mast.
This poor man is barely fed and tortured daily by the vicious Devourers.
The rest of his friends were eaten raw in front of the anguished man.
The Devourers know the weak little man can create a fog cloud a few
times a day. Kreskinarl sticks a knife into the druid when he desires this
concealing vapor to hide the dragonship. The cloud rolls through the
tunnel ahead of the marauders.

Drake, Fire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Breath weapon, pyrophoric blood, resistance to fire
(50%)
Move: 9/30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Fire drakes look like small dragons with translucent scales of mottled
mauve and burgundy, black wings and crimson eyes. Heat and steam
rises from the dragon's body. Fire drakes lair in caves and caverns deep
within the hills and mountains. Fire drakes are carnivorous creatures and
very territorial, fighting other drakes that move into their area. They are
tolerant of other fire drakes, but view them with suspicion. On occasion,
a mated pair is encountered, but only in the late summer months or early
autumn.
A fire drake can spit a cone of fire to a range of 40 feet five times per day.
Creatures in the cone suffer 2d8 points of damage (saving throw for half
damage). A fire drake's blood is highly flammable and ignites in a burst of
flame upon contact with the air. A creature that makes a successful attack
with an edged or pointed weapon (including natural weapons like claws)
against a fire drake must succeed on a saving throw or take 1d3 points of
damage from the splashing blood.

Fire Drake Blood The blood of a fire drake can be sealed in an airtight container
and used as a firebomb, equivalent to a burning flask of oil. It
can also be used to create temporary flaming weapons. A weapon
coated with fire drake's blood inflicts an additional 1d6 points of
damage with each hit for 1d4 rounds.

Credit: The Fire Drake originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Dave
Waring.

Flame on!
In the center of the maze-like city of basalt blocks and roofs of brilliant
tin there rises the Grand Temple of Celestial Fire, home to the city's
theocrat. The stifling city rests at the bottom of a deep crater, gouged
from the earth by a meteor a thousand years ago and now surrounded
by basalt fortifications flying red dragon-shaped pennons. The people of
the city are miners and smiths, extracting from the ground all manner of
metals and precious stones, and possessing the knowledge of building
blast furnaces powerful enough to work the iron-nickel composites they
extract from the reddish ore.
The Grand Temple is their pinnacle of their achievement - four stories
tall and built in the style of a pagoda with golden roofs and walls clad
in reddish marble veined with black. Storks of mechanical brass pose
outside the temple in pools of crystal clear water (maybe the only clean
water in the entire city) and brass hawks fly about the highest level of
the temple day and night. The interior of the temple is one gargantuan
space containing a 40-foot tall idol of the lord of celestial fire, posed with
one leg raised, a massive glaive in his hands. The idol is constructed of
wrought iron and decorated with crushed glass in shades of amber, ruby
and maroon. A pool of fire surrounds the idol, the massive pedestal of
which is home to a family of 1d3+5 fire drakes, the largest of the brood
being the theocrat who “rules” via magical signs left in his steaming
droppings and analyzed by the temple's priests, who dwell in small living
cells the line the perimeter of the inner temple.
The fire drakes are pampered creatures, fat and lazy and no longer cut
out for rugged combat (no more than 3 hp per hit dice), but they
are still dangerous enough. Their latest “communique” has set the people
of the fire city to the task of constructing large aqueducts across the salt
plains and into the snowclad mountains that surround them.

Drake, Ice
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Bite (1d6), 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Breath weapon, spells, alternate form, immune to
cold, double damage from fire, magic resistance (40%)
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Ice drakes look like small, immature white dragons with icy white
scales and sapphire eyes. Ice drakes are found in cold mountainous caves
and caverns. Most encounters are with a solitary drake. Only in the winter
months is it common to find a mated pair or family. An ice drake can spit
a cone of freezing air to a range of 40 feet five times per day. Those in the
cone suffer 2d8 points of cold damage (saving throw for half damage).
Ice drakes can cast the spells fear and sleep, each twice per day. Twice
per day, an ice drake can assume the shape of a young white dragon as
a standard action. It can remain in this shape for up to 2 hours at a time
and while in this shape has the statistics of a 6 HD white dragon of age
category 2. It retains its own ability to cast spells, loses its own breath
weapon and does not gain the white dragon's breath weapon.

Credit: The Ice Drake originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Mike
Ferguson.

The Last Stand
The ice drakes of the high mountains and rugged plateaus once lived in
relative peace until the bold legions of the fire city came, the swaggering
rascals seemingly taking offense at being treated as an exotic and novel
delicacy. Around the construction sites of their aqueducts the soldiers
have constructed forts that are assaulted nightly by the ice drakes, who
treat it as a dangerous game.
The elder drakes of the far patrols have recently caught wind of their
children's sport, and are on their way to put an end to it by destroying
the source of their amusement. One fort in particular is commanded by a
rather surly dwarf - grumpy because he's an engineer and way in over his
head when it comes to fighting dragons. He has but fifteen men-at-arms
left under the command of a rather dashing sergeant-at-arms. A clutch
of 1d4+1 ice drakes has surrounded the fort and awaits only the fall of
dusk before they attack. Dozens of frozen corpses lie in various states of
consumption around the makeshift wall of stone and timber.

Drake, Salt
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8), bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Spit salt, regenerate 2 hp/round
Move: 15/60 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

Salt drakes resemble blue dragons with mottled black wings and
crimson eyes. They are found in warm, arid climates such as deserts or
salt flats. Salt drakes are omnivorous creatures and very territorial, even
fighting among themselves to protect their domains. Most encounters are
with a solitary drake. Only in the midsummer months is it common to
find a mated pair or family. A salt drake's scales range from dull blue
to midnight blue, and it is often mistaken for a young blue dragon. Salt
drakes range from 8 feet to 30 feet long. Though difficult to train, salt
drakes are favored as mounts by goblins, gnolls, and hobgoblins. A salt
drake's primary diet consists of large quantities of salt. This diet enables
the drake to spew salt at its opponents five times per day. This blast of salt
takes the form of a 60-foot cone that deals 3d6 points of damage (saving
throw for half damage) from the grit and dessication.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Prince in Salt
The salt flats that surround the city of fire are home to a few roving bands
of salt drakes. The drakes spend their days lazing in shallow burrows and
their nights prowling about the flats hunting the stony, terrestrial crabs
that also survived the destruction of their shallow sea by meteor storm. A
clutch of 1d4+1 one of the beasts has been preying on the lines of bearers
transporting stones across the flats to the mountains for the construction
of aqueducts. The salt drakes recently hit the jackpot, seizing a prince
of the blood royal who has crept away to adventure in the mountains,
having heard stories of daring battles against dragons. The young moron
has been tucked into a burrow and kept under guard by a sinuous female
drake. His father has only recently gotten wind of his son's disappearance
and has promised a rich reward for any who bring him back alive.

Drake, Splinter
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Breathe thorns, thorn volley
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A splinter drake is a wingless dragon made from wood. They are about
12 feet long and weigh around 800 pounds (24 points of damage). They
breathe a blast of thorns in a cone-shape 40 feet long and 20 feet wide at
the base. A splinter drake can also fire a volley of thorns in a 60-foot-line
that deals 3d6 points of damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Hawthorn Hedges
A long brick-lined well connects the ceiling of this underground room
with the surface above. The 10-foot-diameter tube is filled with thick
vines and briars. Sunlight filters through the vegetation in beams of green
light. The thorny vines spill into the chamber from above and dangle
just inches from the floor. The vines look easy enough to climb, but are
covered in sharp spines that make the task painful and difficult (1d3
points of damage every round climbing). The surface is approximately
80 feet above. The bones of hundreds of rodents and woodland creatures
lie scattered on the floor of the room at the bottom of the well. A horrible
smell of rotting meat is strong in the blocked well.
The shredded and entangled corpse of an elf hangs halfway up the
passage. The well is the lair and ambush spot of a splinter drake. The
drake is virtually invisible amid the dense vegetation. The drake hunts
outdoors, but patiently waits for the opportune time to attack those
climbing about in its lair.

Draug
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Cutlass (1d6) or 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Call storm, control ship, resistance to fire (50%)
Move: 12/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

The draug is the vengeful spirit of a ship's captain who died at sea,
thus being denied a proper burial. If an entire ship sinks at sea with the
loss of all hands, the ship itself and its entire crew may return as ghostly
wanderers. The captain usually rises as a draug and his crew rises as brine
zombies (see that entry). A draug looks as it did in life, wearing the same
clothes and bearing the same possessions it held at the moment of death.

The arrival of a draug is often taken as a death portent, for even if it
does not attack, some dire circumstance is likely to befall the witness. A
draug often acts as a death token, rising out of the sea and staring at or
pointing a bony finger at a sailor fated to drown. Once per day, a draug
can summon inclement weather to harass its opponents. The effects are
felt immediately (i.e., there is no gradual shift in the weather). Otherwise,
this ability is identical to the control weather spell. A draug has full
control over its vessel (wind notwithstanding) so long as it remains at the
wheel or within 20 feet of the helmsman. Should it leave the area, its ship
meanders in a random direction until the draug regains control.

When a ship sinks beneath the waves, it and its entire crew may return as
ghostly wanderers, especially if the captain and crew had a less than
scrupulous profession (as pirates, for example). A sunken ship of this nature
may undergo a transformation from the evil surrounding it. When this happens,
the ship rises from the deep, piloted by a draug and manned by skeletons,
brine zombies, zombies, and lacedons. The ship appears as it did at the time
of its demise. The sails are tattered and the decks covered with seaweed. When
a draug is at the helm, the “ghost ship” gains several powers. Regardless of
the condition of the hull, a draugpiloted ship remains afloat in any weather
conditions. It is not affected by wind of any type (though the draug can still
use the wind to maneuver and sail the ship) and can even sail against
gale-force winds. Strong waves may toss the ship about, but will not capsize
it as a result. A draug ship is so waterlogged that it is completely immune to
all fire effects. A draug can maneuver his ship to leave the waves and take to
the air as long as the draug remains on board. This functions as the fly spell
cast by a magicuser with a caster level equal to the draug's HD.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Dead Men Tell No Tales, Or Do They?
For the past fifteen years, the ship of a terrible pirate has sat in the midst
of a grand harbor, a prison hulk for members of its former crew. The ship
was taken by a fleet of galleons after a storm had deprived it of masts
and sent the ship's captain over the side, a dirk lodged in his spine. As
members of his former crew died, they were tossed over the side, their
ankle chains attached to an iron band around the remains of the main
mast, their bloated bodies steeping in the brine. For all these fifteen years
the captain, now a vengeful draug, has trod the sea floor on a direct course
for his ship. He is now very close, and the bodies of his expired crewmen
are responding to his presence, their waterlogged (1d6+5 brine zombies)
or skeletal (2d4 skeletons) remains shifting gently. Soon, they will climb
their chains and their old master will again command his ship and cut a
crimson road of blood and plunder across the silvery waves.

Dream Spectre
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 claw (1d4 + sleep)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: enchanted slumber, death gaze, +1 magic
weapon to hit
Move: 14 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

Dream specters are incorporeal creatures that look like spectres. They
are not undead, however. Their claw attack puts victims into an enchanted
slumber (saving throw avoids). One creature per round seeing a dream
specter must save or be reduced to 1 hit point. Unless healed, the victim
dies in the next round. Dream specters can also enter the dreams of
sleeping creatures within 100 feet. A dream is powerless in daylight.

Dreams of a Forgotten Shore
A dead tree dominates this bizarre room. Unusual mobiles and
medallions made from twigs twirl from the tree's branching, each slowly
spinning in an absent breeze. Tens of thousands of tiny carved faces cover
the tree's bark-stripped trunk. The corpse of a man is impaled by iron
spikes against the tree. The spikes pin him through his legs and left side,
while his right hand still clutches a hammer strapped around his wrist
with a leather strap. A bag of iron spikes hangs from his waist. It appears
as if he crucified himself against the tree.
The tree sits in a concave depression of black dirt. A glass dome of
white light is set in the ceiling above the tree, the glare illuminating the
room. Ghostly humanoid figures swirl behind the dome, barely visible in
the white glare.

A 10-foot-dimeter stained-glass wall sits directly opposite the room's
entrance. The wall crudely resembles a scenic ocean landscape with a
brilliant sun rising above the waves. After 2 rounds, the wall shimmers
and transforms into a realistic nighttime view overlooking the same
seashore. A full moon glows above the waves, and a ship's lights bob
on the horizon. Vague silhouettes of gulls fly in and out of the picture.
A reclining woman lies on the sand at the edge of the gentle surf. The
woman seems to be focusing her attention on a sword protruding from
the sandy beach where the waves crash against the beach. The
image is a permanent illusion that changes multiple times
each day. A dream spectre hides in a narrow space behind
the stained glass wall.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Drelb
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Incorporeal touch (1d4 plus nether chill)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: +1 or better weapon to hit, double damage from
silver weapons, immune to mind-affecting spells and abilities
Move: 9/9 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Drelbs are energy creatures that make their home on the Negative Energy Plane.
They appear as spectral figures of darkness with no discernable features save
their eyes - two small pinpoints of light. They are summoned to the Material
Plane by evil spellcasters who task them with the duty of guarding treasure or
secret places to be left alone. Hence, they are sometimes referred to as
haunting custodians. Drelbs are not undead and cannot be turned, though they
sometimes feign being affected. A living creature touched by a drelb
immediately drops anything it is holding and falls prone, shivering for
1 round. There is no save against this attack.

A drelb can rapidly diminish its form while it advances forward. To the
onlooker, it appears as if the drelb is retreating. Creatures succeeding on
a saving throw see through this illusion; otherwise, the drelb advances into
melee range and its opponent is considered surprised for the first round of
comnbat with the drelb.

A drelb can imitate any mind-affecting spell used within 30 feet of it as
though a 5th level spellcaster. Further, any such spell that directly targets
a drelb is reflected back on the attacker with full effect.

Watch Out!
At the pinnacle of the wizard's tower there is a tiny room accessible
only via a trapdoor in the floor. The room is completely bare save for
a tall, double-doored cabinet of cherrywood engraved with a scene of
palms and playful apes. The cabinet has a seemingly simple lock that will
defy all attempts to pick it without the use of a pair of lodestones, which
must be run up either side of the lock while a stream of smoke is blown
into the lock. The cabinet, once opened, will be found to be empty save
for a scrap of parchment resting on the floor. The parchment has reversed
writing on it, which can be easily viewed using on of the two mirrors on
the interiors of the cabinet doors. The words on the parchment are written
in elven and say, roughly translated, “Watch out!”.
At about this point, a drelb will reach out from the mirror behind the
reader of the parchment and snatch up the closest victim. The mirrors both
lead into a strange dimension, a tunnel of swirly smoke and a throbbing
amethyst light. Either end of the tunnel, which is about 50 feet long and
5 feet wide, connects to one of the doors, making the entire dimension
something of a circuit. At the center of the tunnel there is a large casket
of smoky glass with a silver frame. The casket holds the wizard's greatest
treasure, a rickety old wooden sled he new well in his youth, a golden urn
holding the dried eyeballs of a dozen of his rivals and three spell books,
one a copy of the other and the third a tome of cursed reversed spells.

Credit: The Drelb originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Dust Digger
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  5 tentacles (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Sinkhole, swallow whole
Move: 6/6 (burrowing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Dust diggers are nocturnal desert carnivores about 10 feet in diameter.
They resemble brown starfish with five long tentacles ringing a central
maw lined with sharpened teeth and fangs. The creature spends most of
its life buried under sand and dirt, waiting for potential prey to wander
too close or actually wander over the area where a dust digger is buried. A
dust digger inflates its body with air, buries itself under a thin lair of sand
or dirt, and waits for its prey to pass nearby. When a living creature walks
over a dust digger, the creature deflates its body and folds its arms around
the victim, attempting to shove the prey into its mouth.

A dust digger can try to swallow a grabbed opponent by making a
successful attack. Once inside the dust digger's interior, the opponent
takes 2d6 points of damage per round from the digestive fluids and the
squeezing movement of the stomach. A swallowed creature can climb out
of the dust digger with a successful saving throw made at a -3 penalty.
This returns it to the creature's maw, where another successful saving
throw is needed to get free.

A dust digger can glide through sand, loose soil, or almost any sort
of loosely packed earth as easily as a fish swims through water. Its
burrowing leaves behind no tunnel or hole, nor does it create any ripple or
other signs of its presence. A move earth spell cast on an area containing
a burrowing dust digger flings the dust digger back 30 feet, stunning the
creature for 1 round unless it succeeds on a saving throw.

Sand Trap
Your subterranean travels have brought you to the silty remains of an
ancient subterranean lake. The floor of the cavern is silt ranging from 2
to 12 feet deep and acting much as quicksand, as good a reason as any to
have made a purchase from your friendly neighborhood pollier (for one
must assume that any fantasy economy that keeps 10-foot poles in ready
supply has a brotherhood of carpenters devoted to their manufacture).
The lake was drained when a crevasse opened up in the midst of it,
now forming a long, submerged canyon, the upper reaches of which are
pocked with small caves that support a population of aquatic troglodytes.
Numerous insects and fungoid life forms dwell on this water course,
preyed upon by bats (normal sized and giant) that make their home on
the cave roof 300 feet above. The silt desert has its own inhabitants, a
colony of 1d12+8 dust diggers, who lie patiently beneath the silt waiting
for their next meal.

Credit: The Dust Digger originally appeared in the First Edition module I3
Pharaoh (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition
Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Tracy and
Laura Hickman.

Ear Seeker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ear seekers are small maggot-like creatures, white or brown in color. They
are found lairing in rotting wood or similar organic materials. If the check
fails, the ear seekers have contacted the creature and move toward any warm
place on the creature (favoring places such as the ears) in which to lay their
eggs. Once an ear seeker enters a warm place, it lays 2d8 eggs before dying.
In 4d6 hours, the eggs hatch and the larvae devour the surrounding flesh,
dealing 2d6 points of damage to the host each round thereafter. At 0 hit
points, the host dies and the ear seekers crawl out to find a new host. A cure
disease spell kills all ear seekers and any unhatched eggs.

Credit: The Ear Seeker originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Wood Parasites
The tunnel the party is moving through is shored up with thick, wooden
beams. The wood creaks and groans. Gouts of steam explode periodically
from the walls, making the tunnel quite hot and forcing adventurers to
make a saving throw each round they spend in the tunnel or suffer 1d4
points of damage.

The damp wood is home to hundreds of ear seekers. The creatures sense movement
below them and fall from the wooden beams onto the shoulders of victims.
There is a 1 in 6 chance each round (per adventurer) than an ear seeker
assaults them and makes a run for their ear.

Eblis
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Beak (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Spells, fire resistance (50%)
Move: 12/12 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

into a march through the woods from which none emerged alive and intact.
The barque is partially submerged, its teak railings now warped, its
canopy of silk and leather cracked and drapped with mossy vines. Here
dwell the eblis, far away from humankind, plotting petty revenges upon
one another. The hold of the ship is submerged and filled with all manner
of once-expensive stocks, now mostly ruined save for a copper urn,
sealed with wax, that contains brandy worth about 100 gp. In addition,
a ragged tarp covers a pile of gold and silver bars, nearly 1 ton in all and
worth 15,000 gold pieces should one manage to retrieve them.
The leader of the eblis can cast four spells: ESP, obscuring mist,
phantasmal force and fear.

The eblis are a semi-civilized society of birdmen that make their homes in
desolate swamps and marshes. They rarely have interactions with other races,
preferring the company of their own kind and the serenity of their marshland
homes. An eblis is a large bird that strongly resembles a stork — so much
so that eblis are often called “stork men.” An eblis stands about 8 feet tall,
and the neck is extremely long and snake-like and is unnaturally flexible
and capable of blindingly fast movements. An eblis’ beak is long, sharp, and
deadly. A male eblis has gray-brown feathers with reddish patches on its head,
while a female lacks the red patch. Eblis speak their own language of clicks
and chatters and some speak Common. Each eblis flock has one individual
capable of using arcane magic. A spellcasting eblis has 1d6 spells, each spell
usable once per day. Each spell is cast as though a 4th level magic-user.
1d6

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

ESP

2

The Eblis originally appeared in the First Edition module EX2 Land
Beyond the Magic Mirror (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and is used by permission.

Spell

1

Credit: Mirror image

3

Obscuring mist

4

Phantasmal force

5

Fear

6

Invisibility

At Home Among the Mangroves
In a swampy river delta thronged by thick woodland and itself lush with
mangrove trees, there dwells a flock of 4d4 eblis led by a crested male, its thin
neck adorned with a golden torque that allows it to become invisible once per
day for 10 minutes. The eblis dwell on a large, royal pleasure barque that ran
aground (or was forced aground) many years ago, its unhappy revelers forced

Ectoplasm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 10 [9]
Attacks: 1 pseudopod (1d8 + weakness)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: +1 or better magic weapon required to hit
Move: 6 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

This incorporeal ooze resembles a faintly glowing, billowing cloud.
Ectoplasms are not undead. The pseudopod attack of an ectoplasm
imposes a -1 cumulative to-hit penalty to attack and damage with each
strike. It does an additional 1 point of damage against undead.

Mystery Mist
Someone or something recently dug two rows of six graves in this
chamber (or field). A shovel remains embedded in a mound of fresh grave
dirt. A thick mist fills each of the graves, concealing their actual depths.
A parchment listing 12 names (possibly including the name of a PC or
a known NPC) is tacked to the shovel's wooden handle. Several of the
names are crossed out. Someone has also drawn a crude smiley face next
to one of the names.

A set of elegant garments lies across the dirt mound beside one of
the open graves. The clothing looks carefully placed atop the dirt, as if
someone who was wearing it lay down and then vanished. A mound of
nearby dirt contains an abundant amount of burrowing grubs and worms.
One (or more) of the graves contains an ectoplasm. The graves are empty
aside from the ectoplasm and harmless mist. It is difficult to remove the
mist, and it returns after 12 hours.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Elemental, Gravity
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8/12/16
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Strike (2d8)
Saving Throw: 8, 3, or 3
Special: telekinesis
Move: 36 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8 HD (9/1,100), 12 HD (13/2,300), 16 HD (17/3,400)

Gravity elementals are circular regions of
absolute blackness that attack by hurling objects
using telekinesis. They warp and manipulate
gravity within 20 feet of them, giving arrows and
other missile attacks a -6 to-hit penalty. Spells such as
magic missile ignore this warped gravity field and strike true.

Tetrominoes
A nondescript pedestal in the center of the room holds a large glass
bowl. A 40-foot-diameter ring of bubbling water (actually caustic acid
that deals 1d6 points of damage to anyone touching it) encircles the
pedestal. The ring-shaped pool is five feet wide and appears to be about
four feet deep. Spears, two-handed swords and one-foot-diameter metal
globes circle the base of the pedestal in a symmetrical pattern. The
room spans at least 50 feet on each side and a darkness (15-ft.
radius) spell conceals the ceiling 40 feet above the pedestal.
A 5-foot-diameter black sphere of nothingness swirls 20 feet
above the glass bowl. It absorbs light and random chaotic
tendrils lash out of its depths. Silvery liquid fills the bowl
just below the black mass. The liquid is platinum in a
permanent fluid state. The platinum might fetch 5,000 gold
pieces if a means of hauling it can be found. It slips and
slides like mercury if picked up.

A gravity elemental guards the platinum pool. Over the
years, it has amassed quite an arsenal that it keeps hidden in
the darkness along the ceiling using its control gravity ability.
Suspended against the chamber ceiling are 8 large stone blocks
(2d6 points of damage), 3 bloated bugbear corpses soaked in acid
(1d6 points of crushing damage and 1d6 points of acid damage) and a
portable battering ram (2d8 points of damage). The gravity elemental can
drop these at any time in any order within a 20-foot radius of itself. It can
also cause the pool of acid to rise toward the ceiling or to hover in midair.
Creatures bound by gravity (i.e. not flying or levitating) are at its mercy
within 20 feet of the elemental.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Elemental, Negative Energy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8/12/16
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Strike (1d8 + energy drain)
Saving Throw: 8, 3, or 3
Special: Level drain (1 level with hit)
Move: 36 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8 HD (9/1,100), 12 HD (13/2,300), 16 HD (17/3,400)

A negative energy elemental appears as a sphere of translucent gray energy
with small motes of light winking in and out of existence. The touch of
a negative energy elemental drains 1 level with each hit. When slain,
a negative energy elemental detonates in a 30-foot-radius blast that deals 1d6
points of damage per 2 HD.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Staff Infliction
The emaciated corpse of a man stands before you, leaning heavily on a
staff carved of obsidian. His round hollow eye sockets and gaping mouth
bear an expression of disbelief. His skin looks as if it was slowly baked into
a fibrous shell with a skeletal framework. A magenta light pulses along
the length of the staff. The man's garb hints that he once practiced the
magical arts. The magic-user's equipment appears to be intact and
untouched on his body. A belt pouch holds a pair of gloves.
The staff acts as a receptacle for a negative energy elemental that is
attracted by living beings. Any living creature that touches the staff
unprotected releases the elemental for 2d4 rounds. After the time
lapses, the negative energy elemental is sucked back into the staff.
Handling the staff with gloves does not release the elemental. In
fact, a person wearing gloves or gauntlets can effectively use the
staff as a weapon. The staff deals 1d6 points of damage and drains
one level with each strike (a successful save resists the level drain).
The staff can be used to strike opponents a total of five times before
the staff shatters and permanently releases the elemental to wreak havoc.

Elemental, Positive Energy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8/12/16
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Strike (1d6 healing)
Saving Throw: 8, 3, or 3
Special: Positive energy burst
Move: 36 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8 HD (9/1,100), 12 HD (13/2,300), 16 HD (17/3,400)

A positive energy elemental appears as a shimmering sphere of brilliant white
energy with small motes of light winking in and out of existence. Its attacks
imbue bonus hp upon targets that last up to one hour. A creature
reaching double its normal hp explodes. When slain, a positive energy
elemental detonates in a 30-footradius blast that heals 1d6 points of damage
per 2 HD.

Solar Power
A 20-foot-diameter polished marble dais sits low to the floor. In its center
stands a pure white statue of a glorious angel with its wings spread wide and
its arms reaching toward the ceiling. A holy symbol made of platinum and
encrusted with sapphires hangs from its neck, separate from the carved figure.
Between its outspread fingers floats an orb of brilliant white light. Arcs of
energy silently discharge from the sphere in chaotic, lightning-like rays.
A scripture written around the base of the statues reads “Behold the power of
the sun, blessed be the righteous in pain and cursed be the glutton and vain.”
A positive energy elemental hovers above the statue. It attacks undead
outright and anyone who dares desecrate this small shrine. This encounter acts
as a rejuvenation point for weary and wounded adventurers, but also poses
a danger for those who stay too long.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Elemental, Psionic
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8/12/16
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Strike (2d6)
Saving Throw: 8, 3 or 3
Special: Psionic powers, +1 or better weapon to hit, magic
resistance (30%), telepathy 100 ft., warp reality
Move: 24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8 HD (12/2000), 12 HD (16/3200), 16 HD (20/4400)

As the body lies seemingly dead on the ground, a dark vapor emerges
from its mouth, forming into a 12 HD psionic elemental. The elemental
offers passage through one of the crystal doors if those assembled can
best it in combat. If reduced to fewer than half its starting hp,
the elemental inhabits the crystal statue, animating it. The combined
creatures will fight as a stone golem with the mental powers of the
elemental. If finally reduced to 0 hp, the crystal doors become
portals of light leading wherever the Referee has a mind to take his
players.

Psionic elementals appear as a dark, semi-translucent clouds of swirling
vapor. They have their origin on a plane composed entirely of psionic
matter and seldom venture from their home except when summoned by
a spellcaster. It is unknown whether psionic elementals can speak; all
communication with these creatures thus far has been through telepathy.
Looking closely at a psionic elemental's form reveals two small pinpoints
and a mouth formed of solid bits of matter swirling in the elemental's
form.

Psionic elementals can cast the following spells: Dimension door, ESP,
magic missile (3/day) and suggestion (3/day). Large psionic elementals
can also use telekinesis at will. They enjoy a +2 bonus to saving throws
against mind-controlling or affecting spells or abilities.
By folding the dimensions around its body, a psionic elemental can
automatically deflect one attack per round directed against it back upon
the attacker. The attacker takes full damage just as if he had hit the
psionic elemental (including any special effects of the attack). Spells can
be reflected using this power, but only those that specifically target the
elemental. Area of effect spells are not reflected and have full effect on
the psionic elemental.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Essence of Desire
At the bottom of a dusty well (octagonal in shape, approximately
20 feet wide) in a forgotten dungeon there sits a sculpture in blue
crystal. The sculpture depicts an elderly woman, beautiful and stately
garbed in ornate platemail and holding before her a golden rod tipped
with an amber sphere. The well is easily 60 feet deep and contains,
at the bottom, four doors each carved from a single large crystal and
apparently affixed to the wall with no opening behind it.
The crystal idol, for an idol it is, carved by a man who loved a woman
from afar and imbued this magnificent scuplture with the fire of his
passion and all the energy of his fevered, troubled mind. The golden
rod if touched, gives off a powerful electrical shock that stuns for 1 full
minute.

Common Time Elemental
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack: 2 slams (2d6 plus cell death)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Cell death, multimanifestation, foresight, immunity to
magic, magic resistance (40%), time
jaunt, +1 or better weapon to hit
Move: 9 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 20/4400

A time elemental can slip through the time stream and appear anywhere on the
same plane of existence as if by teleporting. This ability transports the time
elemental and up to four other creatures within a 30-foot radius.  Unwilling
creatures can attempt a saving throw to avoid being carried away.

Time elementals are creatures from an elemental plane most sages are
unaware even exists. A time elemental is a powerful creature formed of pure
time and matter such as is unknown to even the most learned of sages. It
is unknown how or why time elementals enter the Material Plane, as they
cannot be summoned using the standard summoning spells. Time elementals
appear as formless clouds of coppery vapor or sparkling dust about 5 feet
in diameter. They attack by forming misty or smoky arms from their forms
and lashing at opponents or by spraying a fine mist onto their opponents so
as to induce aging. Damage dealt by a time elemental's slam attack does not
heal naturally, but it can still be healed magically. A creature slain by a time
elemental can only be raised through the successful casting of a wish spell.
Once per day, a noble time elemental can age a creature simply by touching
it (this requires a melee attack that ignores one's armor bonus to AC). If
successful, the target must succeed on a saving throw or advance forward one
aging step (from adulthood to middle age, from middle age to old, from old
to venerable, and so on). A venerable creature affected by this ability dies and
cannot be restored to life by mortal magic. Alternately, a time elemental can
use its alter age ability to reduce a character's age. A character that regresses
in age does not revert to earlier mental states, retaining all memories and
mental abilities. This ability does not affect a character that has died from
old age. A time elemental can also use this ability to age vegetable matter
10-200 years (older or younger) or mineral matter 100-2,000 years (older or
younger). Royal time elementals can use this ability twice per day.

A time elemental exists in several other dimensions at any given time. It can
bring forth 1d4 of these manifestations to its current locale in order to gain
multiple attacks that round. Treat each manifestation as a separate time
elemental with hp equal to the time elemental's current hp.
A manifestation cannot use any of the spell abilities of the time elemental
except foresight. A time elemental cannot have more than four manifestations
present at one time. Because each manifestation is a part of the time
elemental that called them, a successful attack on the time elemental or any
of its manifestations deals an equal amount of damage to them all.

By making a melee attack against a foe, a noble or royal time elemental can
remove that creature from the current time stream.  On a failed save, the
creature disappears in a flash of white energy.  For a number of minutes equal
to the time elemental's Hit Dice, the displaced creature is effectively
nonexistent. No form of magic, effect, or force can detect or aid such
a creature. When the effect ends, the creature reappears in the same space it
was in before being displaced. If the space is occupied when the creature
returns, it is shunted aside to the first open space and takes no damage.
A noble or royal time elemental can use this ability three times per day.

Once per day, a royal time elemental can attempt to summon 1d4 common
time elementals with a 70% chance of success or 1-2 noble time elementals
with a 30% chance of success. Noble and royal time elementals can create an
effect identical to a time stop spell once per day. All time elementals can see
a few seconds into the future. This ability prevents it from being surprised.
Time elementals are immune to all time-related spells and effects (though the
time stop ability of the noble and royal time elementals can affect those time
elementals of lesser power).


Credit: The Time Elemental originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Noble Time Elemental
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20
Armor Class:-3 [22]
Attack: 2 slams (2d8 plus cell death)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Alter age, cell death, multi-manifestation, temporal
displacement, time stop, foresight, immunity to magic, magic
resistance (50%), time jaunt, +2 or better weapon to hit
Move: 9 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 32/8600

A time elemental can slip through the time stream and appear anywhere on the
same plane of existence as if by teleporting. This ability transports the time
elemental and up to four other creatures within a 30-foot radius.  Unwilling
creatures can attempt a saving throw to avoid being carried away.

Time elementals are creatures from an elemental plane most sages are
unaware even exists. A time elemental is a powerful creature formed of pure
time and matter such as is unknown to even the most learned of sages. It
is unknown how or why time elementals enter the Material Plane, as they
cannot be summoned using the standard summoning spells. Time elementals
appear as formless clouds of coppery vapor or sparkling dust about 5 feet
in diameter. They attack by forming misty or smoky arms from their forms
and lashing at opponents or by spraying a fine mist onto their opponents so
as to induce aging. Damage dealt by a time elemental's slam attack does not
heal naturally, but it can still be healed magically. A creature slain by a time
elemental can only be raised through the successful casting of a wish spell.
Once per day, a noble time elemental can age a creature simply by touching
it (this requires a melee attack that ignores one's armor bonus to AC). If
successful, the target must succeed on a saving throw or advance forward one
aging step (from adulthood to middle age, from middle age to old, from old
to venerable, and so on). A venerable creature affected by this ability dies and
cannot be restored to life by mortal magic. Alternately, a time elemental can
use its alter age ability to reduce a character's age. A character that regresses
in age does not revert to earlier mental states, retaining all memories and
mental abilities. This ability does not affect a character that has died from
old age. A time elemental can also use this ability to age vegetable matter
10-200 years (older or younger) or mineral matter 100-2,000 years (older or
younger). Royal time elementals can use this ability twice per day.

A time elemental exists in several other dimensions at any given time. It can
bring forth 1d4 of these manifestations to its current locale in order to gain
multiple attacks that round. Treat each manifestation as a separate time
elemental with hp equal to the time elemental's current hp.
A manifestation cannot use any of the spell abilities of the time elemental
except foresight. A time elemental cannot have more than four manifestations
present at one time. Because each manifestation is a part of the time
elemental that called them, a successful attack on the time elemental or any
of its manifestations deals an equal amount of damage to them all.

By making a melee attack against a foe, a noble or royal time elemental can
remove that creature from the current time stream.  On a failed save, the
creature disappears in a flash of white energy.  For a number of minutes equal
to the time elemental's Hit Dice, the displaced creature is effectively
nonexistent. No form of magic, effect, or force can detect or aid such
a creature. When the effect ends, the creature reappears in the same space it
was in before being displaced. If the space is occupied when the creature
returns, it is shunted aside to the first open space and takes no damage.
A noble or royal time elemental can use this ability three times per day.

Once per day, a royal time elemental can attempt to summon 1d4 common
time elementals with a 70% chance of success or 1-2 noble time elementals
with a 30% chance of success. Noble and royal time elementals can create an
effect identical to a time stop spell once per day. All time elementals can see
a few seconds into the future. This ability prevents it from being surprised.
Time elementals are immune to all time-related spells and effects (though the
time stop ability of the noble and royal time elementals can affect those time
elementals of lesser power).


Credit: The Time Elemental originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Royal Time Elemental
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 24
Armor Class: -5 [24]
Attack: 2 slams (2d8 plus cell death)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Alter age, cell death, multi-manifestation, summon
time elementals, temporal displacement, time stop,
foresight, immunity to magic, magic resistance (60%), time
jaunt, +3 or better weapon to hit
Move: 9 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 37/9500

A time elemental can slip through the time stream and appear anywhere on the
same plane of existence as if by teleporting. This ability transports the time
elemental and up to four other creatures within a 30-foot radius.  Unwilling
creatures can attempt a saving throw to avoid being carried away.

Time elementals are creatures from an elemental plane most sages are
unaware even exists. A time elemental is a powerful creature formed of pure
time and matter such as is unknown to even the most learned of sages. It
is unknown how or why time elementals enter the Material Plane, as they
cannot be summoned using the standard summoning spells. Time elementals
appear as formless clouds of coppery vapor or sparkling dust about 5 feet
in diameter. They attack by forming misty or smoky arms from their forms
and lashing at opponents or by spraying a fine mist onto their opponents so
as to induce aging. Damage dealt by a time elemental's slam attack does not
heal naturally, but it can still be healed magically. A creature slain by a time
elemental can only be raised through the successful casting of a wish spell.
Once per day, a noble time elemental can age a creature simply by touching
it (this requires a melee attack that ignores one's armor bonus to AC). If
successful, the target must succeed on a saving throw or advance forward one
aging step (from adulthood to middle age, from middle age to old, from old
to venerable, and so on). A venerable creature affected by this ability dies and
cannot be restored to life by mortal magic. Alternately, a time elemental can
use its alter age ability to reduce a character's age. A character that regresses
in age does not revert to earlier mental states, retaining all memories and
mental abilities. This ability does not affect a character that has died from
old age. A time elemental can also use this ability to age vegetable matter
10-200 years (older or younger) or mineral matter 100-2,000 years (older or
younger). Royal time elementals can use this ability twice per day.

A time elemental exists in several other dimensions at any given time. It can
bring forth 1d4 of these manifestations to its current locale in order to gain
multiple attacks that round. Treat each manifestation as a separate time
elemental with hp equal to the time elemental's current hp.
A manifestation cannot use any of the spell abilities of the time elemental
except foresight. A time elemental cannot have more than four manifestations
present at one time. Because each manifestation is a part of the time
elemental that called them, a successful attack on the time elemental or any
of its manifestations deals an equal amount of damage to them all.

By making a melee attack against a foe, a noble or royal time elemental can
remove that creature from the current time stream.  On a failed save, the
creature disappears in a flash of white energy.  For a number of minutes equal
to the time elemental's Hit Dice, the displaced creature is effectively
nonexistent. No form of magic, effect, or force can detect or aid such
a creature. When the effect ends, the creature reappears in the same space it
was in before being displaced. If the space is occupied when the creature
returns, it is shunted aside to the first open space and takes no damage.
A noble or royal time elemental can use this ability three times per day.

Once per day, a royal time elemental can attempt to summon 1d4 common
time elementals with a 70% chance of success or 1-2 noble time elementals
with a 30% chance of success. Noble and royal time elementals can create an
effect identical to a time stop spell once per day. All time elementals can see
a few seconds into the future. This ability prevents it from being surprised.
Time elementals are immune to all time-related spells and effects (though the
time stop ability of the noble and royal time elementals can affect those time
elementals of lesser power).

Credit: The Time Elemental originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.


To Infinity and Beyond
The plane of time exist in between the ticks of a clock. It is limitless and
vast, though mortals who enter it view everything as though with tunnel vision,
perceiving only the merest shred of the place at any given moment (though the
term moment ceases to have much meaning on the plane of time, it still governs
the limited mortal mind and is a habit hard to give up).

The plane appears as just that, a vast plain of parched earth cut with a never
ending array of parallel lines resembling the grooves on a vinyl record. These
grooves appear no more than an inch deep, though a clumsy character may
discover that each is really the width and depth of the grand canyon and holds
representations of all the detritus of some moment in time. These representations
are white and crude features, like copies of a real objects or persons carved
from foam. Touching one of these objects allows one to understand everything
about its double at the moment (a milisecond, perhaps) captured in this strange
canyon.

On the plane above, one notices the completely black sky, and although there
is no obvious source of light, the entire plane appears to be lit with a warm,
reddish light. As one wanders this endless plane, they might come across one
or another of the coppery mists that is a time elemental (roll 1d6: 1-3 = solitary
common elemental; 4-5 = noble elemental plus 1d2 common elementals; 6 =
royal elemental plus 1d2 noble elementals and 1d4 common elementals).
The goals of the time elementals are inscrutable, and they might just as
likely ignore travelers as attack them or throw them into some far distant
time from their own. The time elementals dwell in massive palaces formed
of vaguely suggested geometries and filling the entire plane, though they are
completely invisible to beings incapable of thinking fourth dimensionally.
For those so attuned, they discover that the source of the plane's light, which
to such enlightened individuals is be perceived as a rainbow-like aura rather
than a reddish glow, is a giant symbol of infinity floating above the plane and
corruscating in a neverending flux of colored light.

ELEMENTAL CONSTRUCTS

Elemental constructs are golems or automatons forged of one of the four basic
elements—air, earth, fire, or water— bound to serve their creator. The
creation of an elemental construct requires no less than five elemental
spirits (of the same type) which are unwillingly bound into the form of the
elemental construct.

Elemental constructs are used by powerful mages as servants, bodyguards, and
assassins. An elemental construct, like any other automaton follows any order
or command given to it to the best of its ability.

An elemental construct's creator can command it if the construct is within 60
feet and can see and hear its creator. If not commanded, an elemental
construct usually follows its last instruction to the best of its ability,
though if attacked it returns the attack. The creator can give the elemental
construct a simple command to govern its actions in his or her absence. The
elemental construct's creator can order the construct to obey the commands of
another person (who might in turn place the elemental construct under someone
else's control, and so on), but the elemental construct's creator can always
resume control over his creation by commanding the elemental construct to obey
him alone.

Each elemental construct appears as a humanoid creature about 9 feet
tall and is composed entirely of its native element.

Elemental Construct, Air
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 90 hp
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Pummel (3d6) or wind blast 30 ft. radius (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Immune to magic, +2 or better magic weapon required to hit
Move: 36 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

An air elemental construct is a 9-foot-tall semi-vaporous humanoid
composed of air and mist. An air elemental construct transforms the air
in a 30-foot radius around it into a forceful blast of wind and debris that
deals 2d6 points of damage. Control winds and control weather spells
heal an air elemental construct (1d8 per spell level). Any cold-based
attack slows an air elemental construct. No other type of spell affects an
air elemental construct.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Funeral Dahabeah
Ruins of looted tombs and shrines line the banks of the murky river.
Tomb raiders centuries ago stole the tombs’ treasures and carried off the
remains of mummies entombed within. Vandals defaced the hieroglyphs
and chipped at the memorials to leave them unrecognizable. Embedded
atop a small mastaba is a massive bronze chain that extends into the sky.
The chain is connected to a bronze boat floating hundreds of feet above
the riverbank. The chain and boat are the only artifacts that have not been
defiled by robbers.

The bronze dahabeah serves as a ceremonial funeral barge for a high
priest of the wind demon, Pazuzu. The priest lich Khuenaton lies in repose
in the barge above the river. Four air elemental constructs hold the ship
aloft indefinitely. They remain invisible while they lift the bronze barge.

Only one lets go of the barge to defend against intruders at a time. The
boat drops a quarter of the distance to the river each time one of the air
elemental constructs leaves its post. The last air elemental construct sets
the barge gently down in the river before it turns to defend Khuenaton's
resting place. Although the bronze barge floats, it was not intended for
water travel and is sluggish difficult to navigate.

In addition to the lich Khuenaton, the boat holds the 6 mummies of his
former wives, viziers and a vast amount of treasure.

Elemental Construct, Earth
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 90 hp
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Pound (4d6) or trample (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Immune to magic, +2 or better magic weapon
required to hit
Move: 8
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

An earth elemental construct is a 12-foot-tall humanoid composed of
dirt and rock. An earth elemental charges opponents, dealing 2d6 points
of damage with a hit. An earthquake spell immediately destroys an earth
elemental construct. Transmute rock to mud and move earth heals an earth
elemental construct (1d8 per spell level). No other type of spell affects an
earth elemental construct.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Farmers in the Dell
The bustling farming village of Roudell thrives with hard workers and
bountiful crops. In fact, the indentured servants and farmhands work with
dedication and determination unlike any other village in the area. The
town is pristine and perfectly manicured. Everyone seems ecstatically
cheerful no matter what chore they do. The reason for the insane
happiness? The landowners and town elders formed a cult to an earth
elemental lord and regularly sacrifice farmhands and servants who do not
meet their stringent expectations.

The townsfolk of Roudell built a crude shrine at the far end of the dell
for when a worker needs to be “disciplined.” Eight stone obelisks stand
upright in a circle, and mounds of dirt encrusted with blood lie between
them. Piles of skulls, some with dried flesh still attached, surround the
dirt mounds. One or more of these mounds of dirt are earth elemental
constructs left here to guard the shrine and the town's appalling secret.
Within the confines of the obelisks are many small depressions, each
filled with unrefined salt. In the midst of the enclosure is a servant buried
up to his neck in the earth. His mouth and eyes are encrusted in salt in a
horrific ceremony of sacrifice to the elemental lord. The headless bodies
of other servants lie buried in the depressions.

Elemental Construct, Fire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 90 hp
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Strike (3d6) or fire bolt (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Immune to magic, immune to fire, +2 or better
magic weapon required to hit, ignite materials
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

A fire elemental construct is a 9-foot-tall humanoid composed of flame.
Their attacks cause flammable materials (including wood) to ignite. A fire
elemental construct launches a bolt of fire 90 feet that does 2d6 points of
damage. Fire-based spells heal a fire elemental construct (1d8 per spell
level). Cold-based spells do double damage to the creature. No other
spells affect a fire elemental construct.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Fire Chaser
Four shallow troughs create an intricate maze on the floor of this large
room. The troughs are six inches deep and about a foot wide and create a
five-foot-wide twisting path to the opposite side of the room to a landing.
A clear oily substance fills the channels. A brass brazier on the landing
contains a blazing fire in which floats a ring of cold resistance (as a ring
of fire resistance, but the wearer is immune to cold). The ring is hot, but
undamaged by the blaze. The fire in the brazier is actually a fire elemental
construct holding the ring inside itself.

Four paths lead through the trough maze from the entry to the other
side of the room. A route through the maze can easily be discovered by
studying the grooves for just a few minutes. Once a path is stepped upon,
however, four geysers of flame appear in the troughs on the entry side of
the room. All four of the spouts extend from floor to ceiling. The flame
spouts race along the trough maze, instantly creating a wall of fire as they
move. Most creatures can outrun the flames, but it should be a close race.
While the walls are hot and burn anyone passing through them, creatures
remaining in the centers of the paths are safe. The walls remains for 1d4
hours until the flames consume the oily substance filling the troughs.
The troughs refill in 1d4+3 hours and the flame geysers reset. The fire
elemental construct attacks anyone attempting to remove the ring. If
commanded to do so, it hands the ring over willingly.

Elemental Construct, Water
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 90 hp
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Slam (3d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Immune to magic, +2 or better magic weapon
required to hit, engulf, drown
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

A water elemental construct is a 10-foot-tall humanoid composed
entirely of water. The elemental's slam attack engulfs opponents, and
they drown in 2d4 rounds if they can’t escape the creature's liquid form.
Create water heals a water elemental construct (1d8 per spell level).
Lower water instantly destroys a water elemental construct, while part
water divides the creature into 2 equal halves. Fire-based spells do double
damage. No other spell affects a water elemental construct.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

When It Rains, It Pours
The damp door to this room is swollen with moisture and sticks in its
frame. A trove of books, scrolls and gazettes fill shelves built along the
wall in this chamber. The air is humid and laden with moisture. Black
mold grows on nearly every inch of the room. Beads of water cover
the ceiling and drop throughout the room like rain. Hundreds of glass
containers, ceramic jars and metallic urns sit on the floor catching the
falling water. Several large ceramic urns are large enough for a humansized creature to climb into. A rocky mineral crust coats the containers
and floor. Water overflows from many of the containers and eventually
drains through cracks in the flagstone floor.

A water elemental construct guards this room. It hides in a shallow pool
just above the ceiling and flows down through the holes to form its body
in the library before attacking.

The library contains books related to water and the sea. The large
majority are ruined beyond repair. A set of metallic plates written in the
language of merfolk details the steps and materials need to create a helm
that allows a surface-dwelling wearer to survive indefinitely underwater.
The library's creator made a poor decision in creating a water elemental
construct to serve as the room's guardian. The construct attracts water to
keep itself sustained in the dungeon environment.

Elemental Dragon, Air
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 24
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  Bite (2d10), 2 claws (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, cyclone, spells, +2 or better
weapon to hit
Move: 9/48 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 33/8300

The Elemental Plane of Air is home to many creatures: elementals,
belkers, and the great djinni. Yet none are as feared as the elemental air
dragons. Their great form and majestic aura strike fear into the bravest
of souls. Elemental air dragons are as chaotic as their brethren (the other
elemental dragons) and take joy and pride in swooping over a settlement
or village and destroying it with their cyclonic powers. Watching
the frightened creatures flee in terror provokes some sort of perverse
excitement in these dragons. Luckily, elemental air dragons rarely enter
the Material Plane. Elemental air dragons dislike cloud dragons and
mist dragons and seek to slay them whenever they are encountered. The
average air elemental dragon is 30 feet long and appears to be a huge
dragon composed of vapor and smoke. Three times per day, an elemental
air dragons can breath a cone of superheated air. The cone measures 50
feet long and 30 feet at the base and inflicts 10d8 points of damage (save
for half).

By beating its wings rapidly back and forth, a hovering elemental air
dragon can create a cyclone-like force of wind in a 30-foot radius around
its body. This cyclone has the following effects: movement through the
cyclone is one-third normal, ranged attacks suffer a -6 penalty in the area,
and all non-magical unprotected flames are extinguished. Creatures in
the area must succeed on a saving throw or take 3d6 points of damage
each round they remain in the area. Human sized or smaller creatures
in the area must succeed on a second saving throw or be knocked prone
and back 1d4 x 10 feet, taking 1d6 points of nonlethal (i.e. cannot
reduce hp lower than 1) damage per 10 feet. Flying creatures are
automatically grounded in this area.

Elemental air dragons can cast control weather once per day.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Wind Power
The pinnacle of the tallest mountain in the universe is ever buffeted by
howling winds that create a deafening roar as they brush rapidly across a
great cave entrance. The entrance is perfectly round, as though carved by
intelligent hands and completely unadorned (nor will a dwarf be able to
find any mark of tools). This round cave gives entrance to a round tunnel
that worms its way into the heart of the mountain (and providing no hand
holds to allow one to climb down it).
At the bottom of the tunnel is the lair of a great elemental air dragon,
exiled from its home plane by a cabal of its brethren. Once a mighty king
among its kind, the dragon's cruel whims drove its ambitious and jealous
rivals into a shaky alliance that lasted as long as it took to shunt the beast
into the mortal world. It now dwells in its hidey hole, brooding and bitter
and unable to force its way back to its home plane.
When ejected into the Material Plane, the great king's soul was shattered
and thrown to the four winds, where it now takes the form of ornaments
worn by 12 queens of sylph-kind. Should the ornaments be gathered and
swallowed by the beast, it can leave its exile and take its revenge on its
surviving rivals. The beast charges those who enter its lair with this task,
or promise them a most unpleasant death.

Elemental Dragon, Earth
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 24
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  Bite (2d12), 2 claws (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Assimilation, breath weapon, only harmed by +2 or
better weapons, freeze, meld into stone
Move: 9/30/9 (flying/burrowing)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 33/8300

Elemental earth dragons are the strongest of the elemental dragons.
Using their great stone tail or earthen claws, they can destroy almost
anything in short order. The majority of their time is spent burrowing
through the Elemental Plane of Earth devouring gems, minerals, and
silicate life forms. On occasion, they are summoned to the Material Plane
by evil (and foolish) spellcasters who usually live just long enough to
regret their mistake. Elemental earth dragons are chaotic (perhaps the
most chaotic of the elemental dragons in addition to being the strongest)
and despise most other forms of life. They rarely associate with other
creatures, though a few have been known to have dealings with the
occasional earth elemental. Elemental earth dragons cannot enter water;
they must burrow under it or walk around it. The average elemental
earth dragon is 30 feet long and resembles a massive wyrm composed of
polished stone. Its roar can be heard up to 5 miles away.

Three times per day an elemental earth dragon can breath a cone of
scorched earth, 50 feet long and 30 feet wide at the base. Creatures inside
this cone suffer 14d8 points of damage (save for half).

When an elemental earth dragon slays an opponent, it dehydrates the
flesh with its breath weapon and pulverizes the bones. The residue is then
absorbed into the dragon's body. An assimilated creature can only be
restored to life using wish, but even then, there is a 50% chance that such
powerful magic fails.

An elemental earth dragon can hold itself so still it appears to be a
statue. An observer has a 1 in 10 chance (1 in 6 for dwarves) to notice
that the elemental earth dragon is really alive. In addition, an elemental
earth dragon can meld its body with any stone surface large enough to
accommodate its entire body.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Metal Information Broker
There is a place amidst the sun-baked hills along a violent coast where
the earth eternally churns, pebbles and stones of every size and worn
perfectly smooth circle a dimensional vortex that leads into the Elemental
Plane of Earth.

Should one take this passage, they find themselves in a cubical vault
that measures 50 feet long, wide and high, entering through the ceiling
and suffering falling damage as appropriate. Once the travelers, those
who survive the fall, have dusted themselves off and splinted their broken
bones, they discover that the entirety of the cavern is bathed in a rich,
caramel light, thick with dust. Standing in the cavern, one almost feels
the crush of many trillions of tons of stone and soil pressing in on them.
The cavern has a single exit flanked by two massive leonine dragons
carved from polished stone, each with one mighty paw poised over
the exit. As a group of adventurer's walk through this exit, the last
finds themselves plucked up by one of those paws, its owner being an
elemental earth dragon. The creature studies its captive, maybe jostle and
toss it around a bit just to make sure it knows its place, and then quiz it
about where it came from, what passes in the mortal realms and other bits
of gossip.

Attempts at rescuing the victim are met with deadly force. When the
dragon has heard enough (assume three hours of questioning, during
which random encounters occur and encountered monsters neither bother
nor perturb the earth dragon), he sends his captive on their way.

Elemental Dragon, Fire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 24
Armor Class: -5 [24]
Attack:  Bite (2d8 plus 2d8 fire), 2 claws (2d6 plus 2d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, fiery aura, rain of fire, only harmed
by +3 or better weapons, immune to fire, double damage
from cold
Move: 15/36 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 33/8300

This creature appears as a 30-foot long dragon composed of fire. Its
eyes burn with a white-hot flame and flames lick the dragon's great mouth
as it roars. As it flies overhead, its wings send sheets of flame roaring into
the sky and crashing into the ground.

One of the most feared creatures from the Elemental Plane of Fire is
the dreaded elemental fire dragon. Composed entirely of flames, these
magnificent creatures fear little and are respected and feared by those that
have encountered them. Elemental fire dragons are malign and vicious.
They delight in killing and torturing others, especially magmin (whom
they relish as a delicacy). They employ salamanders to aid them in their
ventures, but once they have accomplished their goals, any survivors
are devoured. Elemental fire dragons cannot enter water or any other
nonflammable liquid. The typical elemental fire dragon is at least 30 feet
long and looks like a sinuous dragon composed entirely of fire, with white
hot eyes and gouts of smoke leaking from between its teeth.

Anyone within 60 feet of an elemental fire dragon must succeed on a
saving throw or take 1d6 points of fire damage from the intense heat.
Creatures attacking an elemental fire dragon unarmed or with natural
weapons take 1d6 points of damage each time one of their attacks hits.
Combustibles automatically catch fire if they contact an elemental fire
dragon.

Three times per day an elemental fire dragon can breath a cone of
elemental fire, 50 feet long and 30 feet wide at the base. This fire inflicts
16d10 points of damage (save for half).

An elemental fire dragon can hover and rapidly beat its wings causing
fire to rain down on an area in a 100-foot radius. Creatures within the
area must succeed on saving throw or take 2d8 points of fire damage as
clothes catch fire or armor and weapons become searing hot. The damage
continues for another 1d8 rounds after the attack or until the flames are
extinguished. Combustibles in the area automatically catch on fire.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Lisping Conflagrant Grandiosity
On a basalt island in a sea of fire under a sky that seems filled by the
raging fires of the sun broods an elemental fire dragon, unlucky rival of
the emir of the efreeti. The fire dragon dwells within an active volcano, a
basalt outcropping in the midst of an active lava flow its couch, a harem
of fire nymphs (see entry) tending to its every need and a gaggle of 4d4
lava children (see entry) with maximum hp and clad in tungsten
harnesses and serving as the dragon's honor guard.
His conflagrant grandiosity (one must use this title when addressing it
if they wish to have any chance of emerging from the encounter alive)
looks like a great burning serpent with four wide splayed legs tipped in
claws. It coils itself on its couch, head tucked under a roll of its body
and seemingly drowsing, though really just conserving its energy. The
beast speaks with a notable lisp, its head weaving back and forth while it
speaks. It first wishes to know what visitors know of the efreeti and their
master and then either consumes them or charges them with spying on
the genies on its behalf, knowing full well the mission will probably kill
the travelers.
While the fire dragon seems rather urbane and measured, its loses its
temper quickly and violently, its court usually diving into the lava flow to
escape their master's wrath.

Elemental Dragon, Water
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 24
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  Bite (2d8), 2 claws (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, capsize, drench, spells, only
harmed by +2 or better weapons, transparency
Move: 15/36 (flying and swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 33/8300

From the Elemental Plane of Water comes the elemental water dragon.
They make their homes in the deep oceans of the Material Plane and are
rarely found far away from large expanses of water. An elemental water
dragon is composed entirely of water and commands respect from the
more intelligent sea creatures as well as those humanoids that ply their
trade upon the waters. Elemental water dragons are chaotic and take great
pleasure in demanding sacrifice from those that dare enter their realm.

If the sacrifice placates the dragon, it lets the creature pass unabated;
otherwise, it attacks with all of its might and most often destroys those
that offend it or fail to appease its desires. Water dragons take great
pleasure in capsizing and sinking ships. On occasion, a group of sahuagin
or locathah can be found allied with an elemental water dragon, but this
alliance is usually short-lived and often shaky and ends with the death of
the fish men.

When submerged, an elemental water dragon is effectively invisible (1
in 12 chance to spot, 1 in 10 chance for elves) until it attacks. A submerged
elemental water dragon that surfaces under a boat or ship of less than 20
feet long capsizes the vessel 95% of the time. It has a 50% chance to
capsize a vessel from 20 to 60 feet long and a 20% chance to capsize one
over 60 feet long.

Three times per day an elemental water dragon can breath a cone of
superheated water, 50 feet long and 30 feet wide at the base. The breath
weapon inflicts 14d8 points of damage (save for half).

The elemental water dragon's touch puts out torches, campfires,
exposed lanterns, and other open flames of nonmagical origin as long as
they are no larger than a house fire. The creature can dispel magical fire it
touches as the dispel magic spell. It can part water and lower water each
once per day.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

All Wet
The storm that capsized your vessel and lifted it bodily onto a desert
island came out of nowhere; of the few survivors, none of the old tars will
have ever seen its like. The island you find yourself on is about 100 feet
wide and 200 feet long and composed entirely of white sand, with no life
existing beyond the surf.
As the survivors collect themselves, they are set upon day and night by
1d4+2 giant crabs, who attempt to carry survivors one by one into the sea.
When only three survivors remain, they are visited by a great elemental
water dragon, looking like the sea itself has taken draconic form. The
dragon is in constant motion, forward then back, rising then falling into
the waters and rising again behind the survivors and speaking the entire
time is a deep, resonant voice that is first a whisper and then a roar.
Should the three survivors fight and entertain him, the dragon promises
riches to the sole survivor. Otherwise, it simply destroys them all and
throws their boiled bodies to the fish.

Elusa Hound
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d6+1)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Detect magic
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

The elusa hound appears as a powerful wolf-like dog with pale white,
coarse fur (though some recent breeds have whitish-gray fur) and a short,
bushy tail. Its eyes burn with a ghostly yellow glow and its teeth are ivory
white. The dog is attuned to Magic-Users and can track them unerringly
using its ability to detect magic at will.

Dogs and Bounty Hunter
The bounty hunter Koll Mange was recently hired by the magic-userhating Insydions, a group of barbarians intent on ridding the world of the
taint of spellcasters. The group pays Mange a bounty for every magicuser he slays.
Mange is a brute of a man, standing a seven feet tall with broad shoulders
and gargantuan hands. His brow is a heavy furrow that hides his deep-set
eyes, and his square jaw is framed by a dark red beard. Mange carries a
huge axe with scratches carved in the ashen handle for every magic-user
he has killed. Mange travels with Cur and Larz, 2 elusa hounds he uses to

track magic-users for the bounty offered for their heads.
Cur unfortunately has focused his tracking skills on one of the PC
magic-users, and is now following the PC through hell and high water,
leading him to a date with the business end of Mange's axe.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Encephalon Gorger
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6+1)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: mindfeed, resists
cold, haste, regenerate
3 hp/round
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

An encephalon gorger is a sleek, pale-skinned humanoid standing about 7 feet
tall, with long, thin arms and legs. Its hands and feet end in four digits;
the two middle digits being slightly longer than the outer two. Its mouth is
lined with short, needle-like teeth, with the canines being most pronounced.
An encephalon gorger's tongue is sleek and black. An encephalon gorger strikes
and tears at its victims with its sharp claws. If it hits with two claws, it
grabs the victim and automatic starts to mindfeed in the next round. To
mindfeed, the gorger sinks its teeth into the prey's head to drain cerebral
fluid (1d6 points of damage per round). Twice per day, a gorger can give
itself an adrenal boost of speed (similar to a haste spell). An encephalon
gorger heals 3 hp per round.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Vampire Wannabe
Castle Volkav sits high on the crags above the forlorn village that
shares its name. People speak in whispers of the place, casting a
wary eye toward the castle's turrets. Cloves of garlic hang doors
and windows, and old-timers whisper of the return of the days when
people went missing. Getting to the castle is easy, though no one
willing goes there anymore.

All signs point to Castle Volkav being empty, but vile equipment
and glass containers containing dried flecks of blood still stand in the
laboratory. A surface of a wooden in the center of the stone room is
marred by deep gouges. Thick chains run through rust-coated pulleys
to the table's four corners and a single metal chandelier hangs from
a rusted iron chain. Three sputtering candles give off a dismal yellow
light. Thick mist rolls in the castle's high windows, and a trapdoor set in
the ceiling opens to the outside air.

An encephalon gorger moved into the empty lab a few weeks ago and
has been terrorizing the village ever since. The creature shares the lab
with an invisible flesh golem created by the lab's original owner. The
golem is enchanted to automatically turn invisible after it goes dormant
for 1 hour. The golem stands in the corner, but follows the last command
it was given and hold slams victims onto the table and holds them down.
The gorger takes advantage of this and sucks victim's brains out of their
skulls as the golem goes about its “job.”

Flesh Golem (Invisible): HD 10 (45 hp); AC 9[10]; Atk 2 fists
(2d8); Move 8; Alignment Neutrality; Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000;
Special: Healed by lightning, hit only by magic weapons,
slowed by fire and cold, immune to most spells.

Executioner's Hood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Choke (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Engulf, immune to sleep, vulnerable to alcohol
Move: 6/3 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

The executioner's hood is a deadly monster, black in color and 1 inch
thick, that resembles an actual executioner's hood or a small black bag.
It has two eyeholes that can be used to see into or out of the monster
(if some unfortunate soul happens actually to pick it up — or worse,
put it on). The executioner's hood is sometimes used to guard valuable
belongings. It does so unerringly as long as a constant supply of food is
available. The executioner's hood clings to the ceiling, waiting for prey to
pass under it. When prey passes by, the hood drops and attempts to engulf
the victim's head. Slain victims are slowly devoured by the hood.
An executioner's hood can try to wrap the head of a victim by making
a normal melee attack against a surprised opponent. If successful, it
establishes a hold and deals 1d4 points of damage each round it remains
on the victim's head. Opponents can tear it off by making a successful
open doors roll as though their strength was 3 points lower. A creature
whose head is engulfed cannot breathe, but can hold her breath for 2
rounds per point of constitution. After this period of time, the character
must make a saving throw each round in order to continue holding her
breath, with each successive roll made at a cumulative -1 penalty. When
the character fails one of these saving throws, she suffocates and dies.
Attacks that hit an engulfing executioner's hood deal half their damage
to the monster and half to the trapped victim. An creature whose head is
engulfed cannot cast spells.

An executioner's hood is vulnerable to wine, ale, brandy, or any other
strong alcoholic drink. Each quart poured on the hood deals 1 point of
damage to the creature. After the hood has taken 4 points of damage,
it releases its hold on its opponent and drops to the ground. The next
morning it suffers from a terrible headache unless properly hydrated.

Bat Hoody
You disover a terrible scene of ancient battle, a lone warrior encased in
ancient plane and mail with dozens of broken goblin skeletons littered
around it. The skeletal warrior leans against a wall, three crossbow bolts
hanging from its rib cage and at least twenty others broken on the floor
around it or lodged in the wall.

Tangled vines of tiny, blood red roses grow from the cracks in the glazed,
terracotta floor tiles despite the lack of natural light. Cutting through the
roses to the other side of the room (and an iron door) takes about 10
minutes, while cutting a path to the skeleton takes half as much time.
The skeleton wears a large iron helm surmounted by leather horns and
lined on the inside with what first appears to be black velvet. If placed
upon one's head, the executioner's hood inside will wait a few minutes
before fitting itself over the victim's head and choking it.

Credit: The Executioner's Hood originally appeared in the First Edition module
EX1 Dungeonland (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material
by Gary Gygax.

Eye Killer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Tail (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Constrict, death gaze, light vulnerability
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Eye killers are subterranean dwellers that hate daylight. They dwell
underground in dark places, where very little light can touch their sensitive
eyes. They are evil, malicious creatures that delight in killing others,
particularly those that wander to close to their lair. Eye killers are
limbless spherical things at birth, but take a form that resembles a cross
between a bat and a snake as they mature. The adult creature's upper torso is
that of a large bat while its lower torso is that of a snake. Dark green fur
covers its upper body, while yellow-green scales cover its lower body.

Its eyes are large, lidless, white circles without pupils. The average adult
eye killer reaches a length of 7 feet. Its bat wings are useless. Eye killers
seem to communicate with each other through a series of low rumbles and
growls. They do not speak any known language.

The victim of an eye killer's tail attack must pass a saving throw or be
wrapped and constricted for 1d6 points of automatic damage each round
until freed with a successful open doors check.

By using natural or magical light that illuminates it (i.e. it cannot be in
the dark), an eye killer can amplify the light and refocus it in a line that
functions as a death ray to a range of 50 feet. The eye killer must make
a ranged attack against its target. If successful, the creature struck must
make succeed on a saving throw or die instantly. Even if the save succeeds,
the victim takes 3d6 points of damage. An eye killer can use this gaze once
per day. Eye killers are immune to their own gaze attack and to the gaze
attack of other eye killers. If the eye killer's gaze attack is reflected back
upon it, it amplifies the intensity and projects it at a new target as a free
action. The saving throw against this amplified gaze attack is made at a -2
penalty.

If natural sunlight is brought within 5 feet of an eye killer, it immediately
releases a constricted foe and attempts to move as far away from the
source of light as possible. On subsequent rounds, an eye killer is dazzled
as long as it remains within 5 feet of the light source.

Umbral Eye Killer The umbral or shadow eye killer is a variant of the standard eye killer.
It uses the statistics above for the standard eye killer but can see perfectly
even in magic darkness and can cast darkness 20’ radius three times per
day.

Credit: The Eye Killer originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian
Livingstone.  Umbral eye killer, author Scott Greene.

Evil Eye
In a 20-ft wide tunnel, the ceiling arched and the walls run through with
veins of reflective quartz. Everburning torches, fastened tight to the walls,
run the length of the corridor, dazzling the eyes with the flickering flames
that reflect from the walls.

In the center of the corridor there is a 15-foot deep pit, 10 feet square,
lined with mirrors and inhabited by an eye killer, bound here by cunning
and ancient magics. Two other covered pits are located before and behind
this central pit. Each of these is in all respect like the first save for the
covering. The presence of torches and lanterns in the mirrors pits offers
the beast fuel for its death rays.

The pits are connected by secret passages, the interiors of which are
painted in scenes that forewarn one of deeper dangers of the dungeon.
In the northernmost corridor, one will also find a key of some sort to an
important door.

The pits contain 1d6 x 1,000 sp, 1d4 x 100 gp and a wooden idol of a pit
fiend (worth 85 gp) wrapped in a sack made of shark skin (worth 30 gp).

Eye of the Deep
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Eye rays (see below), 2 pincers (2d4), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Constrict, eye rays, stun cone
Move: 3/9 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

The eye of the deep is a 5-foot wide orb dominated by a central eye and
large serrated mouth. Hundreds of small seaweed-like bristles hang from
the bottom of its body. Two large crab-like pincers protrude from its body,
and two long, thin eyestalks sprout from the top of its orb. Eyes of the
deep are found only in the deepest parts of the ocean, though on occasion
one moves too close to the shoreline and ends up beaching on the sands.
An eye of the deep stranded in this manner dies in 2d4 minutes unless
placed back into the water. Eyes of the deep speak their own language and
the common tongue of seafaring humans. Creatures struck by the eye of
the deep's pincers must pass a saving throw or be caught and crushed for
2d4 points of automatic damage each round until they can pry open those
pincers with an open doors check.

Each of the creature's eyes stalks can produce a magical ray once per
round. The creature can aim both of its eye rays in any direction. Each
of its eye rays resembles a spell cast by a 12th-level caster and requires
a ranged attack (ignores armor) to hit. Each eye ray has a range of 150
feet. The left eye emits a hold person ray, while the right eye emits a
hold monster ray. By combining both eye rays, the eye of the deep can
replicate the phantasmal force spell.

An eye of the deep's central eye can, once per round, produce a cone
extending straight ahead from its front to a range of 30 feet. Creatures in
the area must succeed on a saving throw or be stunned for 2d4 rounds.

Credit: The Eye of the Deep originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Lord of the Depths
A tremendous bubble of silvery glass floats in the sea. The sphere
measures 1 mile in diameter, and though the surface appears perfectly
smooth from a distance, a closer inspection reveals entrances on the top
and bottom of the sphere and four spaced around the middle. Each of these
entrances is circular and is opened by pushing (strength of 16 required).
These tunnels are immersed in water and form ten levels and run right,
left, forward, backward, sideways, up and down, seemingly without rhyme
or reason, many passages blocked by iron doors that variously slide, roll
or pivot open. A great array of sea creatures lurk in these tunnels, all of
which wind eventually toward the spherical (25-feet in diameter) center,
the lair of an eye of the deep. Here, the lord of the aqueous orb directs its
movements through the seven seas by the force of its mind, unleashing its
denizens on aquatic strongholds and villages and gathering into its vaults
all the wealth of the oceans.

Pedipalp Giant False Spider
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice:          2
Armor Class:       3 [16]
Attack:            2 claws (1d4), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw:      16
Special:           None
Move:              12
Alignment:         Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP:2/30

False spiders are spiderlike creatures that are very aggressive and highly
predatory in nature, often hunting at night when the element of surprise is
theirs to be had. False spiders dwell in shallow burrows which the dig with
their massive pincers. There are two kinds of false spiders: pedipalps and
solifugids.

False spiders are highly territorial and are likely to attack any living
creature that enters their area.

Pedipalps are called whip scorpions and look like a cross between a
spider and a scorpion. They have eight legs and two thin antennae. Its
front sports two spider-like eyes and a set of large mandibles. Two large
scorpion-like pincers protrude from just in front of its foremost legs. The
average pedipalp is 5 feet long but can grow to a length of 10 feet.

Poisonous Pedipalp
The poisonous pedipalp is a rare variety of the species. Rarely
encountered, the poisonous pedipalp is a solitary creature; no more than
one has ever been encountered at a given time. They do not associate with
others of their kind or with normal pedipalps. The poisonous pedipalp
uses the same statistics as the normal pedipalp with save it has a challenge
level of 3. When threatened, a poisonous pedipalp releases a cloud of
noxious fumes in a 20-foot radius around its body. Living creatures
within the cloud must succeed on a saving throw or be nauseated for 1d6
rounds. The poisonous pedipalp can use this cloud three times per day.

Credit: The Pedipalp and Solifugid originally appeared in module Q1 Queen of
the Demonweb Pits and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and are used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Solifugid Giant False Spider
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice:          5
Armor Class:       4 [15]
Attack:            2 claws (1d6), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw:      12
Special:           None
Move:              12
Alignment:         Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP:5/240

False spiders are spiderlike creatures that are very aggressive and highly
predatory in nature, often hunting at night when the element of surprise is
theirs to be had. False spiders dwell in shallow burrows which the dig with
their massive pincers. There are two kinds of false spiders: pedipalps and
solifugids.

False spiders are highly territorial and are likely to attack any living
creature that enters their area.

Solifugids are at least 6 feet long but can grow to a length of 12 feet.
They have eight legs, two spider-like eyes and a set of large, clicking,
hooked mandibles. Two large scorpion-like pincers protrude from just in
front of its foremost legs.

Credit: The Pedipalp and Solifugid originally appeared in module Q1 Queen of
the Demonweb Pits and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and are used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Hair Today
In a dry savannah there rise the towering nests of a large brood of giant
termites. The termites, about the size of wolves, are now in hiding, their
halls stalked by a giant solifugid. The solifugid has made a burrow in a deep
pit within the termite halls, coming out occasionally to hunt down a termite.

The pit once belonged to the termite queen. Approximately 1d10+10 termites
still lurk in the nest, scattered and confused. The solifugid has started
making forays into the savannah to hunt mammals, needing their hair to line
its new nest, which now holds a clutch of the beast's eggs.

Fear Guard
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: Incorporeal touch (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Fear aura, spell-like abilities, create spawn
Move: 12 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Fear guards appear as translucent hooded figures wearing
flowing robes of gray or black over a suit of incorporeal armor.
Their hands end in terrible claws. Their faces are a swirl of
maddening images, fluctuating between a serene and calm
countenance to a face twisted in horror and fear. Fear guards
strike from the shadows, using their incorporeal touch. Any
creature slain by the creature becomes a fear guard within 1d6
rounds. A fear guard radiates fear (as per the spell) in a 10-foot
radius. Twice a day, a fear guard can cast darkness, 15 ft. radius.

Fear and Loathing
A black slab of hardened shale juts out from the cliff face, forming a
ledge above a 150 foot drop in the Porshire Peaks. Vines dangle from the
cliff above to the slab. A gold sigil of intertwined snakes is etched into the
shale and burns with a sickly green flame. A carved basalt doorway sits
about 10 feet into a stone recess and has a similar glowing sigil carved
into its otherwise featureless surface.
The door is the entrance to the tomb of Marlena Eboncore, the wife of
a particularly jealous magic-user named Hagstrom. Marlena was a loyal
wife (most of the time), but her eye was sometimes inclined to wander
– a fault that Hagstrom put up with until he caught her with a visiting
jester. In a blind rage, he slew the jester with a burst of magical fire,
then locked Marlena in her chambers. He didn’t know about the
poison she’d hidden in the room.
Hagstrom buried Marlena on the cliff overlooking the sea where
they met, but was left uneasy. He feared one of her many lovers –
some powerful magic-users and clerics – might raise her from the
dead, something he couldn’t bring himself to do despite his undying
love for her. Hagstrom loathed himself for what he drove his beloved
to, and eventually drank the same poisonous concoction that killed her.
If the tomb door is opened by anyone other than Hagstom, it causes
the sigil on the shale platform to explode (6d6 points of damage). The
explosion shatters the shale and causes the entire platform outside the
recess to drop into the ocean below. The mountain stone is enchanted and
the platform regrows in three days.
Inside the tomb, a bier of black stone holds a burial vault engraved
with Marlena Eboncore's likeness. A fear guard stands silently beside
the tomb, protecting the woman's corpse. As soon as someone enters the
tomb, a magic mouth on the effigy shouts “You’ll never have her.” The
fear guard unleashes its horrid moan as it advances. It won’t leave the
tomb.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Fen Witch
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Death speak, horrific appearance, mind probe,
magic resistance (25%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1700

The fen witch is a creature of legend, found only in the most remote
of places. It is a female humanoid with one nostril, webbed feet and
hands, fiery red eyes and long, unkempt hair. It is a solitary creature and
disdains all that invade its realm. The sight of a fen witch is so revolting
that anyone who sets eyes upon one must succeed on a saving throw or
instantly be weakened, taking 1d8 points of strength damage. This ability
loss cannot reduce a victim's Strength score to 0.

The fen witch can communicate telepathically with any creature within
100 feet that has a language. A fen witch can peer into the mind of a living
creature within 60 feet in an attempt to extract the creature's true name.
The target can resist the mental trespassing by succeeding on a saving
throw that requires all of their concentration. If the save fails, the fen
witch has learned the creature's true name and can use her death speak
ability. Creatures with an intelligence score of 2 or less and non-sentient
creatures are immune to this ability.

If the fen witch speaks the true name of an individual and the individual
hears it, that creature must make a successful saving throw or die. If the
save succeeds, that creature cannot be affected again by the same fen
witch's death speak for one day. Whether the fen witch's death speak
ability is successful or not, the target's name remains fresh in her mind for
one day. After that, she must use her mind probe ability again to retrieve
a creature's true name.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Defenseless Old Women
In the Swamp Never Are
While tromping through a swamp, the ooze gathered about your ankles,
you come across an old woman heading on a perpendicular course to your
own. The woman is hunched and wears a deep, green hooded cloak over
her head, a large bundle of sticks tied to her back. Noticing the strangers
in her swamp, the old woman will turn to face them, making sure her
cargo of human bones remain obscured behind her husky form and her
face hidden in the shadows of her hood.
The old crone engages the adventurer's in conversation, introducing
herself as Old Meg-o-the-Green and proclaiming herself either a canny
sorceress, a spirit of the swamp or the humble widow of a woodcutter.
She has a voice like two great stones sliding against one another, and
a piercing, unnerving laugh. Although she asks many questions, she
never seems to hear the answers, often repeating herself or asking new
questions that have already been answered.
This is, of course, because she is busy probing minds for true names.
When the adventurers tire of her, she will bid them farewell, speaking the
true names she has already learned and then striking at the others with
her claws after first hurling her bundle at the face of a spellcaster. If she
manages to win her fight, she’ll throw a body over her shoulder and leave
the others to rot in the muck.

Fetch
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3+2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Freezing touch, immune to cold, vulnerable to fire
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A ragged-looking and rotting humanoid leaps from the snow, its filthy
nails slashing through the frosty air. Its eyes are stark blue and its skin
is pale white. Ice hangs from its scraggly hair. A fetch stands anywhere
from 5 to 7 feet tall and weighs between 100 and 250 pounds. Its rotting
flesh is drawn tight around its bones and flushed grayish-white. Its hair
is scraggly and frozen and ice crystals cover its skin. A fetch's eyes are
stark blue. Fetches strike with their claws, which are supernaturally cold
and deal 1d4 points of cold damage. A fetch is vulnerable to fire (taking
an extra 50% damage).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Cold War
A frozen field stretches out between the snow-covered evergreen trees.
Thousands of freeze-dried hands, arms and heads lie partially buried in
the tundra. Gauntlets, golden rings and even weapons are still grasped
in the icy dead hands. One skeletal hand holds a broken hand-and-a-half
sword. Its pommel glows a cold blue aura. The elven name “Tazeen” is
skillfully etched into the hilt.
The area looks as if the ground has slowly swallowed the remains of
a large battle. Six goblins carefully pick through the remnants on the
opposite end of the field. Holding broken and rusted weapons, they
quickly flee with their plunder at first sight of any intimidating threats. In
the midst of the field, 2d4 fetch hide just under the permafrost awaiting
fresh victims to walk above them. The battle took place between humans
and elves nearly a century ago. Other than the name Tazeen, no identifying
clues have survived.

Crab, Fire (1HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3 + 1d4 fire)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Heat, immune to fire
Move: 6/9 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

A fire crab resembles a large crab in most respects. Its carapace is
reddish-brown with dark red or yellow markings and its body is slightly
square-shaped. Tiny flames lick its body, erupting at irregular intervals
from its underbelly. Its eyes are perched on the end of two large eyestalks
that protrude from the center of the carapace. Fire crabs have large claws
and in males, one claw is always larger (at least three times larger) than
the other. Fire crabs have six segmented and spindly legs, blackish-red
in color. Fire crabs generate intense heat, dealing heat damage with their
claw attacks.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Crab, Fire (3HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6 + 1d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Heat, immune to fire
Move: 9/12 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A fire crab resembles a large crab in most respects. Its carapace is
reddish-brown with dark red or yellow markings and its body is slightly
square-shaped. Tiny flames lick its body, erupting at irregular intervals
from its underbelly. Its eyes are perched on the end of two large eyestalks
that protrude from the center of the carapace. Fire crabs have large claws
and in males, one claw is always larger (at least three times larger) than
the other. Fire crabs have six segmented and spindly legs, blackish-red
in color. Fire crabs generate intense heat, dealing heat damage with their
claw attacks.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Playing With Fire
The Kulspout Volcano is alive with spurting flames and clouds of
poisonous gases that roll down its jagged slopes. Burning boulders thrown
into the air land with resounding crashes before the bounding rocks tear
pine trees out by their roots. The air is thick with clouds of choking ash
that turn the day into night.

A narrow fissure in the side of the volcano opens into a steamy cavern
containing a 30-foot-wide pool of lava. Molten rock flows over a series
of boulders in a hissing lava-fall that feeds the lake. Hollowed-out rocks
sit on the edge of the lava. A 10-foot-wide flat slate platform sits in the
center of the lava pool. A 10-foot-tall conch shell sits in the middle of the
rock. Scattered gold coins lie on the slat platform. The coins are hot to the
touch, and deal 1d6 points of damage to unprotected flesh.

A fire crab lives in the shell, and scuttles out to attack if anyone steps
onto the platform. It is the largest and claimed the shell as its own. In the
lava pool and hollow rocks are 5 more fire crabs.

Nymph, Fire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Dagger (1d4 plus 1d4 fire) or slam (1d2 plus 1d4 fire)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Heat, spells, immunity to fire, magic resistance (5%),
double damage from cold
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos or Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Fire nymphs are beautiful females with long, flowing, fiery-red hair,
pale blue eyes and skin with the color and scent of cinnamon. Fire
nymphs dwell on the Elemental Plane of Fire. Fire nymphs rarely visit
the Material Plane, though mages are known to request their company on
occasion. A fire nymph usually wears translucent robes of white or ash.

Fire nymphs can all spells involving fire as 7th-level spell casters. A fire
nymph's body generates intense heat, causing opponents to take an extra
1d4 points of damage every time the creature touches the fire nymph. A
fire nymph's metallic weapons also conduct this heat.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Too Hot to Touch
For days you see a thick plume of smoke, often punctuated by momentary
images of horrified spirits ascending into the heavens. Following it brings
you to the smoldering remains of a palace. All that remains of the place
are crumbling white walls, marble floors marred with soot and bare stone
pillars once coated with precious metals that have pooled on the ground.

In the center of the palace there is a sunken chamber which has been turned
into a fire pit fed by once expensive furniture and silks. The architect of
the pit and the fire that destroyed the palace is a fire nymph, summoned by
a sorcerous sheik who offered her an impertenance when his charm against fire
proved inadequate to the touch of the nymph. In no time the great sheik found
himself ablaze, his servants running about in a panic and the nymph
luxuriating in the chaos.

The fire nymph is now building a shrine to her master that she might
contact him and find deliverance from the frigid Material Plane.

Fire Phantom
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d4 + 1d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Fire blast, immune to fire, immolation
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

This humanoid has raging fire for hair and flame-encased fists.
Elemental fire plays across its body exposing patches of charred flesh.
Its eyes and tongue look like tiny balls of molten fire. Blackened teeth fill
its mouth and flames dance in the back of its throat.

Fire phantoms appear as humanoids with raging fire for hair, flameencased
fists, and elemental fire playing across their bodies. A fire phantom's eyes
are tiny balls of molten fire, as is its tongue. Fire phantoms attack with
fiery fists that deal an extra 1d6 fire damage. Once every 1d4 rounds, they
can hurl a globe of concentrated flame up to 30 feet (2d6 damage, save
avoids). As a last resort, a fire phantom can detonate itself in an inferno
that does 6d6 points of damage to all creatures within a 10foot radius (save
for half). The explosion kills the fire phantom if it fails a save, and causes
its flames to extinguish for 1 round if it succeeds.

Fire Lake
The volcano's caldera bubbles and seethes with noxious gases, the lava
held in check – for the moment – inside the mountain. A narrow crevice
leads into the peak, the steam and fire making the journey a torturous
ordeal. The rocks glow red, and metal soon becomes too hot to touch. The
path winds through the igneous rock until it opens onto a lake of lava. The
rim of the volcano rises above the open lake.

The Buntau tribesmen in the jungle village below sacrifice their warrior
dead by placing their bodies on shale biers that float on the lake of fire.
The bodies ride the lava currents until the rocks break apart and sink.
Currently, five bodies float on the lava, the corpses blackened and hard,
like charred cinders left too long in a fire. Each bier carries the person's
favored weapons. One of the bodies clutches a +1 flaming mace. Another
corpse wears a necklace of firebaubles, although it is blackened and
charred and appears to be nothing more than rocks placed around the
corpse's neck.

Five fire phantoms stand on the shale platforms to protect the dead. The
creatures attack anyone disturbing the bodies.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Snake, Fire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (1d4 plus paralysis)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Paralysis, immune to fire, double damage from
cold, surprise on a roll of 1-4 on 1d6
Move: 9/12 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/60

A fire snake resembles a normal snake with reddish-orange scales and
stark white eyes. They range in size from 2 feet to 6 feet in length. Fire
snakes make their homes in fires and rarely journey more than 30 feet from
such an open flame. A fire snake's preferred method of attack is to hide in
a nearby fire and then surprise its foes as they come nearby. A fire snake
attacks by biting its opponents with its sharp fangs. A creature hit by a fire
snake's bite must succeed on a saving throw or be paralyzed for 1d6 rounds.

Credit: The Fire Snake originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Michael
McDonagh.

Ayesha of the Flames
In the black mountains that serve as the border of Jinnistan, there is
a miles long tunnel. The entrance to the tunnel is faced with blue jade
carved in the shape of a mass of dancing apsaras, the eyes of several of
them hiding poisoned darts that are triggered when one places a foot upon
various of the 101 marble steps that lead up to the portal.
The tunnel is fairly straight and level, and appears to have been melted
through the mountains rather than excavated. Every 100 feet, the tunnel is
blocked by a coruscating curtain of flame. Lining the tunnel are hundreds of
red marble statues of dancing fire nymphs surrounded by roaring pits of flame.

About 1 in 6 of these pits contains a pack of 1d4+1 fire snakes.  In roughly
the midpoint of the tunnel there is an especially tall statue, the base
engraved with the name Ayesha. This statue is surrounded by a shallow pit of
white flames 30 feet in diameter containing three especially nasty fire snakes
(maximum hp) that will strike any creature entering the flames with a charisma
score below 16.  Any who dare to throw a piece of gold into the pit may
attempt to walk across the flames to the statue of Ayesha to retrieve a small
sphere of rose quartz from those resting on the pedestal.  The individual
attempting the walk must possess supreme concentration (i.e. roll wisdom score
or less on a 1d20). Every traveler to Jinnistan knows anyone exiting these
tunnels without a quartz sphere will discover themselves violently unwelcome.

Whale, Fire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 bite (3d6), tail slap (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Scalding blast, immune to fire
Move: 18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A fire whale is about 30 feet long, though specimens as long as 60 feet
have been seen swimming the fiery seas. The fire whale's body is crimson
red mottled with yellow and orange spots, particularly along the back
and shoulder area. The fire whale has a wide angular mouth. A fire whale
attacks with its bite and tail slap. Surface creatures that threaten a fire whale
are subjected to its scalding blast attack. The blast of superheated air from
the whale's blowhole to burn opponents (4d6 damage, save for half).

The Great Red Whale
Captain Melvilic needs a crew to sail the whaler Acushnet. His last
crew – may the briny deep give them peace – didn’t survive the last
voyage. Just one hardened sailor came back from that fateful trip when
the good captain encountered the great red whale. It's been a month since
the Acushnet last sailed. She's been in dry dock since the battering she
took when the massive red whale charged the ship. Melvilic is determined
to sell the whale's blubber to the candlemakers, and its meat to the fish
markets. The captain will pay 200 gp per sailor who signs on to track the
demon fish. No one in the port town of Queen's Run will sign, and one old
sailor named Elijah warns PCs to be wary of Melvilic's destructive desire.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Firefiend
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  3 longswords (1d8 plus 1d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Spit, immunity to fire, double damage from cold
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

A firefiend is a rare creature from the Elemental Plane of Fire that takes
the form of a three-sided column of fire, each side sporting a single arm,
leg and face. In each arm the creature carries a flaming longsword. Upon
first glance, a firefiend strongly resembles a fire elemental of the same
size, but beyond that the resemblance ends. Its three faces constantly
scowl and scream at opponents, cursing them in the flowery language of
the efreet. If an opponent understands this language, he will comprehend
only incoherent babbling and cursing. Once every other round, each of
the firefiend's faces can spit a fiery cinder to a range of 10 feet at one
opponent. A target takes 1 point of fire damage and must succeed on a
saving throw or catch on fire. Because of their three faces, firefiends are
very difficult to surprise.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Out of the Frying Pan . . .
You enter a completely black cavern, as hot as an oven and of
indeterminate size, but at least 500 feet in diameter. The ceiling is rather
low (8 feet), and in the center of the chamber there is a white pillar of light
10 feet in diameter. As someone in the party walks toward the pillar, it
dims while the rest of the cavern becomes bathed in a rising light. When
that person reaches the perimeter of the central “pillar”, it will have
become as black as night and the rest of the cavern almost blindingly
brilliant and revealing no discernable exit in the smooth, gray walls of
the round cavern.

Stepping into the blackness, elves and dwarves will find the ability of
their eyes to pierce the darkness reduced, everything appearing hazy and
indistinct. Light spells give off a wan, wavering light in the darkness. In
the blink of an eyes, a firefiend will appear in the center of the pillar of
blackness, brandishing its swords and babbling its curses. Any attempt to
leave the blackness proves that it is now endless. The only way to escape
is to destroy the fire fiend, at which point the blackness will contract into a
pillar 3 feet in diameter. Stepping into the pillar will either lift one slowly
through a hole in the ceiling or drop them slowly through a hole in the
floor, depending on whether they wish to escape the dungeon or delve
more deeply into it.

Snail, Flail
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  4 slams (1d8)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Immunity to fire and poison, light blindness, warp
magic
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

For a greater challenge, you can inflict a “greater flail snail” on your
players by increasing the monster's Hit Dice. For every Hit Dice above 4,
a flail snail has one additional mace-like tentacle with which it can attack.
Thus, a 6 HD flail snail has 6 tentacles; an 8 HD flail snail has 8 tentacles;
and a 12 HD flail snail has 12 tentacles.

Flail snails are solitary omnivores found in the deepest recesses of
caverns, caves, and dungeons. There they sustain themselves on a diet
of fungus, mold, and rodents. Flail snails are massive snails, the size of
warhorses. Their heads are masses of four thick tentacles, each tipped
with a mace-like ball. The snail's shell is striped in bright colors of red,
blue, yellow and green, while its flesh is gray-blue. The shell of a dead
flail snail can be sold on the open market for 3,000–5,000 gp. Abrupt
exposure to bright light blinds flail snails for 1 round. Any time a spell
targets a flail snail, there is a chance it produces a random effect rather
than affecting the creature. Only spells that directly affect a flail snail are
warped. Area spells are not affected by this ability. Roll 1d10 and consult
the table below to determine random effects.

======= ========================================================================
d10     Result
======= ========================================================================
**1-2** Spell misfires; targets creature nearest the flail snail
**3-4** Spell functions normally
**5-7** Spell fails; nothing happens
**7-9** Spell misfires; caster disoriented for d4 rounds, save to cast while disoriented
**10**  Spell rebounds on caster
======= ========================================================================

Credit: The Flail Snail originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Simon
Tilbrook.

Greater Flail Snail It Rhymes, Too
As you traverse a narrow ribbon of a tunnel deep beneath the earth, you
come upon a massive flail snail coming the other way, plodding slowly
along. Beyond the snail the tunnel slant sharply upwards and is coated
with the creature's slime. The way back should be long enough to force
players into making a difficult choice.

Should one check the walls, they discover a secret door that gives access
to a chute to a deeper level of the dungeon. The shell of the flail snail has
been drilled through, an adamantine chain and manacles attached. These
manacles are currently secured around the wrists of a slime-covered,
beaten and bloody hobgoblin king, overthrown by his nephew and sent
into the dungeon to meet his doom.


Flea, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5 hp
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d2 + blood drain)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Blood drain, disease, leap
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

Giant fleas are blood-sucking parasites that prey on warm-blooded
animals. They have strong hind legs with powerful tendons that allow
them to leap up to three times their Move rate. A giant flea is about a foot
long, with an oval, flattened body. If a giant flea hits with a bite attack,
it latches on to automatically drain the creature's blood (1d4 points of
damage) in the next round. After it drains 4 total hp, it leaps away
to digest its meal. There is a 5% chance that a giant flea carries a disease.

Dead Elephants
Several lumps of brown fur lie in heaps in a weed-covered field.
Buzzards glide in lazy circles, their spirals descending toward the dead
animals on the plains below.
The furry lumps are mammoths that collapsed after drinking from a
watering hole poisoned by mineral runoffs. The giant animals only
recently died.
But they haven’t stopped moving. The furry hides of the mammoths
part and shift, the hair moving in odd lines along the dead mammoths’
backs and sides. A colony of 28 giant fleas burrows through the thick
pelts. Four fleas hide on each of the seven mammoth carcasses. The fleas
burst from the mammoths’ fur and leap onto opponents who get too close
to the dead mammoths.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Gnoll, Flind
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2+2
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Flindbar (1d6+1)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Flinds are a race closely related to gnolls. The two races share some
strong similarities, and at first sight inexperienced adventurers could
easily confuse the two. Flinds are much stockier than their lanky kin,
much stronger and hardier, and are certainly more dangerous. It is
unknown if flinds are a subspecies of the gnoll or a genetic anomaly
produced among large gnoll packs. Flinds are often found among gnoll
bands acting as leaders; their strength and relatively superior intelligence
puts them above their lesser brethren. Flinds speak Gnoll and about 15%
of them also speak the common tongue.
A flindbar is a weapon that consists of two iron bars, approximately 18
inches in length, connected by a length of chain. With a flindbar, the wielder
gains a +2 bonus on attack rolls made to disarm an enemy. Flindbars inflict
1d6 points of damage. They weigh 2 pounds and cost 4 gp.

Credit: The Flind originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (© TSR/
Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by J. D.
Morris.

Gnoll Lords
The broad veldt that separates the jungle from the sea is the domain
of the flinds, rapacious nomads who make temporary camps on rocky
outcroppings, covering them with their graffiti and using their heights to
spy potential victims on the plains. The Jagged Finger tribe, denoted by
their copper-colored muzzles and back-turned pinkies (a rite of passage,
and a painful one at that), are one such tribe of 1d10x20 flinds and their
1d10+10 gnoll servants.
The flinds are primarily scavengers, the sea coast abutting their
native grassland littered with treacherous reefs and harried by a tribe of
sahuagin. While the flind are happy to pick up odds and ends of cargo,
they primarily prey on the crew of these ships, enslaving them and selling
them to the ape men of the jungle.
The flind are led by a silver-haired male with 7 HD and a quick temper.
He is assisted by 1d2 sub-chiefs with 4 HD and one 3 HD sergeant per 20
flind. The sergeants of the tribe are all females wed to the chief and acting
as his executioners and advisors. The sergeants are adorned with copper
jewelry (bandles, neck bands, nose rings) and carry two-handed bronze
executioner's swords. Each female sergeant rules over a matriarchal clan
and competes for the favor of the chief, hoping one of their cubs will one
day replace him when he grows to old to defend his throne.
The flind's complete treasure consists of 1d8 x 1,000 sp, 1d10 x 100 gp
and 20 square yards of lace (weighs 60 pounds, worth 100 gp) salvaged
from a shipwreck.

Floating Eye
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d2)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Hypnotic gaze, surprise on a roll of 1-5 on 1d6
Move: 24 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Floating eyes look like 6-inch long, semi-transparent fish with a single
large eye located in the center of its body along its dorsal region. They
are most often found underground in forgotten dungeon waterways
and underground lakes and seas. The creature's eye is capable of
bioluminescence, and it has such minute control over the intensity and
patterns of the light that it can mesmerize other creatures that see it.
Floating eyes are part of an unusual symbiotic relationship with a variety
of predatory fish, including sharks. Once the floating eye has mesmerized
its prey, predatory fish move in and consume it. After they have eaten, the
floating eye moves in and gorges itself on the scraps. Floating eyes are
small saltwater fish that have transparent bodies and a single large eye
about the size of a walnut located in the center of their body. Creatures
meeting the gaze of a floating eye must succeed on a saving throw or stare
blankly at the floating eye for 1d6+1 rounds. A swimming creature that
fails its save does not sink, but floats on the surface of the water.

Credit: The Floating Eye originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

From the Abyssal Depths To Your Local Aquarium
In the home of the cunning master of thieves there is a grandiose central
chamber furnished with plush couches and low, mahogany tables set with
decanters of potent spirits and boxes of snuff. It is here that the master
thief entertains allies, clients and enemies. One wall of the chamber is
shrouded in a heavy curtain of damask silk in an acanthus pattern.
A thick cord of golden silk hangs from the ceiling and parts the curtains,
but only if one pulls it at an angle - pulling straight down releases a heavy
stone block from the ceiling (4d6 damage, save for half damage). Behind
the curtain is what appears to be a large, thick pane of glass - actually steel
turned glassy via powerful magic.

The glass wall is part of an aquarium holding a variety of long, serpentine
amethyst-colored fish. It also contains a school of 3d4 floating eyes. The
master thief often introduces his guests to the wonders of the aquarium
that the floating eyes might put them into a deep hypnosis, allowing the
master thief to do as he will with them. Particularly hated or annoying
visitors might be chained and dropped into the aquarium from above.

Flumph
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack: Nauseating spray (sickened) or spikes (1d6 plus 1d4 acid)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Acid, nauseating spray
Move: 9 (flying)
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

This small (2 feet in diameter) strange creature looks like a saucershaped
jellyfish with many small spike-like tentacles dangling from its underbelly.
Its body is milky-white in color. Two short eyestalks protrude from the top of
its body. Its eyestalks are gray as are its tentacles. Its eyes are jet black.
Flumphs are strange beings that spend their days floating along looking for
food and water. They are non-offensive and only attack when actively hunting
for food. Flumphs prefer the darkness of the underground and are rarely, if
ever, encountered above ground.

A flumph that hits an opponent with its spikes injects acid into the
wound, dealing 1d4 points of damage. The acid damage continues for the
next 2d4 rounds. Immersion in running water or a cure light wounds spell
stops the acid damage. A flumph's nauseating spray is a 20-foot line that
it can fire twice per day. A creature hit by this poison must make a saving
throw or be sickened for 5 rounds. The odor from this spray lingers in
the area (and on any creature hit) for 1d4 hours and can be detected to a
range of 100 feet. Creatures that come within 100 feet of an affected area
or creature during this time must succeed on a saving throw themselves
or become sickened for 5 rounds.

A flumph is helpless if turned over (requires a successful grapple attack).

Credit: The Flumph originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian
McDowell and Douglas Naismith.

Get Flumphed
The Temple of Transcendentant Wisdom occupies a great square clad in
white stone in the middle of a great capital city. The temple is inhabited
by 4d4 flumphs, the keepers of the pit of wisdom. The flumphs are lawful
and very wise, but can only communicate with those who can contact
their minds telepathically.

The pit is rumored to hold all sort of great treasures and secrets, but
in truth is nothing more than a 200 foot deep well that, in its lower
portions, connects with several tunnels into the underworld. One who
is wise enough to communicate with the flumphs, who spend their days
floating about the temple eating delicate viands from silver platters held
by temple maidens, they will happily tell them everything they wish to
know, provided they are polite and behave themselves.

Giant Fly
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 12/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Giant flies are larger relatives of normal flies. Like their lesser cousins,
they are most often found in areas of garbage, litter, and refuse. A giant fly
resembles a normal fly and can grow to a length of 4 feet, though most
average about 2 feet long.

You Are What You Eat

Credit: The Giant Fly originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

A swarm of 1d6+5 giant flies buzzes over the decapitated head of a titan.
The head appears to have rolled into its present position in a gully from
atop a craggy hillock, though what did the deed is unknown. The flies
have planted their eggs in the head and are now digesting it bit by bit. The
titan's ichor has made the flies especially aggressive, cunning and strong
(max hp), and it has spread the titan's magical abilities among the
giant flies.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Fogwarden
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Lightning bolt (3d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Fear aura, lightning, animate dead, +1 or better
weapon to hit, gaseous form, immunities (cold, electricity,
poison), vulnerable to sunlight, surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 15 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

This creature resembles a humanoid formed of fog and mist. The only
discernible facial feature is its icy blue eyes. It is sometimes called an ice
apparition, for much like the standard apparition, the fogwarden feeds on the
fear of its victims. The fogwarden, however, is not undead. A fogwarden is
usually found inhabiting the coldest and most desolate areas of the world. The
fog surrounding it flashes with its life force. These flashes are often
mistaken for the willo’-wisp. The fogwarden's natural is similar to the
gaseous form spell, except that a fogwarden does not lose any abilities, can
attack its foes, and has a fly speed of 15. A fogwarden radiates
a 30-foot-radius fear aura. A creature in the area must succeed on a saving
throw or be affected as though by a fear spell.

Electricity constantly plays across a fogwarden's form. A creature holding
a metal object that contacts the fogwarden takes 3d6 points of electricity
damage (save for half damage). Once every other round, a fogwarden can loose
this electricity as a stroke of lightning in a 30-foot line (save for half
damage). This electrical aura of the fogwarden can animate dead creatures
within 20 feet as the animate dead spell. The animated creatures resemble
zombies (and use their stats) and are under the control of the fogwarden that
animated them. They are not truly undead however and cannot be turned. If the
fogwarden is slain or moves more than 20 feet from a zombie, the animated
creature collapses dead and cannot be animated again.

Fogwardens shun sunlight. A fogwarden exposed to sunlight can take only move
or attack each round, and is destroyed utterly after 1 hour of exposure if it
cannot escape.

Credit: The Fogwarden originally appeared in the Second Edition Monstrous
Compendium Annual 4 (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1997) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Wizards
of the Coast.

Hard Water Vapor
In the still of a foggy night, a strange figure alights on a quay of a great
mercantile city. The being looks like an amazonian woman formed of swirling
mists and fog. As it makes its way into the city, people and animals flee and
lightning flashes overhead. In a voice that howls like a hurricane, the
creature will say repeatedly “I seek the cup of my lord, bring it to me.”

The fog warden is heading for the home of a wealthy merchant prince, and as it
draws closer it will become more destructive. Any men-at-arms who cross swords
with the entity will likely die and be raised as a foot soldier in a growing
army of the dead that attacks anything in reach, smashing weapons, cracking
skulls, etc. The fog warden seeks a bowl of water elemental command taken from
an island shrine by the aforementioned merchant prince, and it will not leave
without the item.

If the item has passed into other hands, the fog warden does whatever it must
to discover its new location and then proceed on its hunt, hiding in the
daylight hours.

Foo Dog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack: Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Strike chaotics, summon foo creatures, aura,
etherealness, invisibility, plane shift, magic resistance (35%)
Move: 15
Alignment: Lawful
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Foo dogs are extraplanar creatures that serve as guardians to those of
the lawful alignment. They are rarely encountered on the Material Plane,
but when they are, they are always in the employ of a lawful-aligned
creature, acting as either a companion or guardian. A foo creature never
associates with creatures of chaotic alignment. It tolerates those of neutral
alignments.

This large dog has a slightly oversized head and large, bulbous eyes.  Its
paws end in sharp claws. Its fur is golden fading to crimson on the underside.

Foo dogs have a +2 bonus on to hit and damage rolls when fighting
chaos-aligned creatures.

Once per day, by barking, a foo dog can summon 1d4 additional foo dogs with
a 25% chance of success.

A foo dog is protected by an aura of goodness. A chaos-aligned creature that
attacks a foo dog takes a –1 penalty on to hit and damage rolls.

A foo dog can become invisible and/or ethereal at will. A foo dog can enter
the Astral Plane with up to six other creatures, provided they are all within
5 feet of the foo dog.

Credit: The Foo Creature originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.

Tomb Guard Dogs
When the emperor died, his burial chambers had long ago been
completed. The imperial corpse was placed in the center of many rings
of chambers and tunnels dug into the bowels of a sacred mountain. There
are five rings, to be precise, each more deadly than the last. The tunnels
of these rings are studded with traps such as pits of mercury, barbed
crossbows, pivoting stones, hollow stairs filled with green slime.
The inner chamber of the tomb is protected by two foo dogs, frozen into
the form of fierce-looking statues, but released from this condition by the
presence of intruders.
Within the tomb the body of the emperor lies encased in a jade coffin
held aloft by four clay golems in the form of half-ogres in scale armor and
holding halberds. The imperial treasury is kept in a lead chest sunk in a
pool of mercury beneath the funeral slab. The chest holds a 1d4 x 1,000
sp, 1d12 x 1,000 gp, a terracotta lamp in the shape of a qilin (worth 1d3
x 100 gp), a lapis lazuli charm (worth 1d8 x 10 gp) and a belt of golden
chains (worth 1d8 x 1,000 gp).

Forester's Bane
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  6 stalks (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Engulf
Move: 0
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

The forester's bane is a huge, immobile, and carnivorous shrub. Closer
inspection reveals large, tough leaves radiating from its central stalk.
These dark green leaves hide six purple serrated stalks inside its body. At
the center of this low-growing shrub is a 3-foot diameter yellowish orb
from which sprout many small green branches. Each branch has small,
sweet smelling (and tasting) berries of various colors growing from it.
When a living creature moves near a forester's bane's leaves, it attempts
to grab the creature. Trapped creatures are subjected to attacks by 1-6
serrated stalks that slash and cut until the opponent escapes. Trapped
victims are attacked at a +2 bonus. The forester's bane releases a trapped
victim when either it or the victim is dead, or the leaf holding the victim
is destroyed. Because of its four leaves, it can grapple up to four different
opponents at one time. Both leaves and stalks each have 10 hp and
can be attacked. Severing a leaf or stalk deals no damage to a forester's
bane. Attacks that hit a leaf deal half their damage to the monster and
half to the trapped victim. Destroyed leaves and stalks grow back in 2d4
weeks if the forester's bane is not killed.

Feed the Plants
In a narrow, wooded defile cut by a swiftly flowing brook, you see a
struggling figure. The person wears a heavy, green cloak and appears to
have its foot stuck in a trap of some sort that was hidden beneath a large
shrub. The shrub is actually a forester's bane, and the struggling figure is
an illusion created by the orc shaman that calls this place home.
The orc's burrow is located a few yards away from the illusion, the
entrance flanked by a second forester's bane. Inside the burrow, the
shaman has made a small, private lair for herself, hidden from the others
of her tribe. She is a hideous creature with stringy white hair plastered on
her flat head, only the suggestion of a nose and fierce, red eyes. She wears
a cloak adorned by eagle feathers and bone ornaments pierce the loose
folds of skin on her face and back.

The shaman can cast spells as a 3rd level cleric and 2nd level magicuser, and keeps a variety of odd ingredients, powders and tinctures in clay
jars in her cave. Victims of the forester's banes are collected and stripped
for parts - their flesh is eaten, their fat is boiled down to make ritual
candles, their bones used to make tools and ornaments, etc. The berries
from the plants are collected (carefully) and turned into a delicious jelly.

Credit: The Forester's Bane originally appeared in the First Edition module S3
Expedition to the Barrier Peaks (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1980) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and
is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Forgotten One
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d3)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Forgetful presence
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A forgotten one is a foot-tall fey with pointed ears, slanted eyes, and
long, nimble limbs. Most forgotten ones weave twigs and leaves into their
hair for decoration and to help conceal themselves in the treetops. Three
time per day, a forgotten one can cause any creature within 20 feet to
forget meeting the fey (save resists).

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

The Brewer's Life
The mountain town of Alemint is renowned for its superb ales and
frequent festivals. The Oberlyn family has a long history and a solid
reputation as the town's premier brewer. An ill omen has recently settled
over the town, causing the residences to contract a persistent stomach
virus. Greed has overtaken Asleson Oberlyn, the eldest son and heir
to the family business. Asleson has made a pact with a particularly
mischievous forgotten one named Wizil Wixo. In exchange for all ale he
and his companions can drink, Wizil Wixo uses his unique powers over
memory to aid Asleson in his plan to rule the town. Under the forgotten
one's ministrations, the senior Oberlyn and the town elders appear
absentminded and make poor choices while Asleson always manages to
say exactly the right thing. Asleson and Wizil Wixo bend the minds of
others to achieve their goals. Wizil Wixo has a ring of invisibility and
usually follows Asleson closely. Wizil Wixo has no allegiance to Asleson
and departs if bored, discovered or at an opportune time in order to cause
the most chaos.
Asleson has recently sublet a huge portion of farmland to a mysterious
“druid” who promises to increase the quality and quantity of the family's
barley crop.
(See the gargoyle, fungus entry for more on this encounter.)

Forlarren
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 strikes (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Heat metal
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

The powers of a nymph are such that she can enchant and seduce nearly
any creature that has the capacity to know beauty. Some say that even
the great and terrible daemons are not immune to a nypmh's charms. The
forlarren, they say, is the proof. The forlarren is a lonely creature that feels
cursed by its own existence. They look like hairless satyrs, a small ruff of
dark hair covering the back of its head, small horns protruding above its
eyes and a twisted, leering visage upon its face. They detest themselves
and everything they see, consumed by hatred of life itself. Such is their
rage that they seek to vent their ire on law and chaos alike. Forlarrens
speak their own language and some actually speak the common tongue or
the language of nymphs and dryads.

The forlarren attacks with its fists, using them to pummel an opponent. It
focuses on a single opponent in combat and attacks until it or its opponent
is slain. If a forlarren succeeds in killing an opponent, the kindly traits of
its fey mother surface and it shows profound remorse. It ceases combat, if
possible, or flees if other opponents insist on continuing the fight. Should
its opponents allow combat to end, the forlarren may offer its solace
to the surviving companions amid wails and sobs. After a few days,
however, the dominant evil nature of its fiendish father resurfaces and the
forlarren once more attacks all creatures on sight—including those it had
previously befriended.

Once per day, by making a melee touch attack, a forlarren can heat
metal (as the druid spell). Once the affected metal reaches the searing
stage, it remains at that stage until the forlarren breaks contact with the
affected metal. Once contact is broken, the metal slowly returns to its
normal temperature (reducing the effects each round just as the heat metal
spell).

Credit: The Forlarren originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian
Livingstone.

The Ugly Forlarren
Traveling through the woodlands you come across a massive limestone
sarcophagus partially buried in the soil and overgrown with shrubs and
shadowed by two large oak trees. A hideous little forlarren is sitting on the
sarcophagus, a scowl on his face.
As soon as adventurers come into sight, the unpleasant little man
will leap up and charge at the most heavily armored person in the
group. Should the forlarren succeed in killing its victim, it flees into the
woodlands weeping. Some time after, it finds the adventurers again and
throws itself at their mercy for its dark deed. The forlarren tells them of
the wonders hidden beneath the sarcophagus, a great, abandoned fortress
of the ancient wood giants, littered with their relics and now inhabited by
the terrible beasts that bubbled up from the depths and destroyed them.
The halls are still haunted by the unquiet spirits of some of those giants,
and it is said that their thane still sits on his ornate wooden throne, his
magic axe clutched in his cold, dead hands.
Of course, once the forlarren has the party in the depths of the dungeon,
his chaotic personality again takes over and sends him creeping away in
the night to shut them in the lightless confines of the dungeon.

Frog, Giant Abyssal Dire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack: Tongue (grapple), bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Leap, smite law, swallow whole, +1 or better
weapon to hit, magic resistance (10%) resistance to cold
and fire (50%)
Move: 12/15 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Abyssal dire frogs come from the Plane of Slime and are wholly chaotic.
They have a demonic aspect to them, with a spiny and usually poisonous
hide of blackish-green. Their red eyes flicker with demonic intelligence.
They speak the language of demons. Abyssal dire frogs are about 12 feet
long. Once per day, an abyssal dire frog can make a normal attack against
a lawful foe to deal additional damage equal to the frog's total Hit Dice.
An Abyssal Dire Frog's tongue can be attacked. Damage dealt to the
tongue is not dealt to the frog itself. If successful, the frog does not attempt a tongue attack against that opponent for the remaindof the combat.
An Abyssal Dire frog's tongue has an AC of 4[15]

(See the Frog entry in the Animals Appendix for example encounter.)

Credit: The Giant Abyssal Dire Frog made its d20 debut in the Necromancer
Games module D1 Tomb of Abysthor.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Froghemoth
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  4 tentacles (1d6), tongue (1d6), bite (4d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Swallow, resistance to fire (50%), slowed by
electricity, surprise on roll of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 9/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 18/3800

This gigantic creature resembles a giant frog with 4 large tentacles in
place of its front legs. A single eyestalk juts from the top of its head.
Its underbelly is yellow, its body is green, and its tentacles and legs are
mottled green. The froghemoth is a weird aberration that swells in marshes
and swamps. Its tongue is 10 feet long and it uses it to capture its prey.
The froghemoth is a carnivore and feeds on various swamp-dwellers.

The victim of a froghemoth's tentacle attacks must pass a saving throw
or be held fast and pulled to the mouth for a bite attack. Victims of a bite
attack must likewise pass a saving throw or be swallowed whole. Once
inside the beast's belly, a creature suffers 3d8 points of damage per round.
A swallowed creature can attempt climb to climb into the beast's mouth,
where it must make a successful open doors roll to escape. A swallowed
creature can also cut its way out using a dagger to deal 20 points of damage
to the froghemoth's stomach (AC 6 [13]). A froghemoth's stomach can
hold 1 human or elf or 2 dwarves or halflings.

The froghemoth takes no damage from electricity, but is instead slowed
for one round (per the reverse of the haste spell).

Credit: The Froghemoth originally appeared in the First Edition module S3
Expedition to the Barrier Peaks (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1980) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and
is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Paladins are Tasty
In a dank bayou, a froghemoth guards a holy sword. The sword lies
at the bottom of a pool of cloudy water, obscured further by thick vines
and muck. The pool is the lair of the froghemoth. Large, black willows
overhang the pool, their branches home to venomous serpents and a
species of black squirrels with skull faces and eyes that emit a yellow,
sulferous gas that causes those who breath it in to (if they fail a saving
throw) fall into a fitful sleep beset by nightmares. About two dozen
bodies, all belonging to paladins who sought the holy sword, are scattered
about the shallows surrounding the pool.

Frost Man
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Weapon (1d8)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Ice blast, immunity to cold, double damage from
fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Frost men are hunters that make their home in the cold regions of the
world. They appear to be brutish humans dressed in animal skins and furs
and wearing a patch over one eye. Each carries his personal belongings in
small sacks and takes them wherever he goes. A frost man's body radiates
cold out to 30 feet, though not enough to deal damage. Frost men are only
ever encountered as lone males. Perhaps there are villages somewhere
with women and children, perhaps frost men are spawned from the
freezing waste itself. Tribes that are aware of frost men fear them greatly
for their deadly talent and refer to them as “ice demons. Frost men speak
their own language and the common tongue. Three times per day, a frost
man can release a blast of freezing mist in a 30-foot cone from the eye
underneath its eye patch. A creature in the area takes 3d6 points of cold
damage (saving throw for half).

Credit: The Frost Man originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Julian
Lawrence.

The Ice Man Falleth
While traveling across the frozen landscape, you hear a terrible crack, as
though the very earth was split asunder. Later that day, you come across a
crevasse in the ice, about 5 feet wide and many miles long. The crevasse
is about 20 feet deep, and one might come across a human figure at the
bottom of the crevasse, chipping away at ice with an obsidian bladed
knife. Apparently, the man's foot became stuck in the ice when he fell (he
suffered normal falling damage). The man is dressed in furs and looks
something like a neanderthal, only a bit taller and with a less pronounced
jaw and forehead.
Should the party stop to rescue him, they will find him difficult to
communicate with - he apparently does not speak common. The man has
ruddy skin and a thick, curly black beard. Although one eye is covered
by a leather patch, the other is sapphire blue. A leather bag seems to hold
his possessions. Once out of the crevasse, the man might be persuaded to
guide the party elsewhere if offered something he desires. More likely, he
will guide them into a trap, use his frost power against them or in some
other way seek to profit from their demise.
There is also the possibility that he guides them back to his village
- a treacherous hike of seven miles into a maze of ice tunnels guarded
by polar bears that hiding dozens of small burrows inhabited by the
statuesque frost men and their families.

Fulgurate Mushrooms
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: lightning blast (2d6)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: lightning blast
Move: 0
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Fulgurate mushrooms appear as normal mushrooms with faint blue
stems and either bluish-white caps or sapphire blue caps. A typical patch
covers a 10-foot area. When touched, the mushrooms send out a burst of
lightning that deals 2d6 points of damage (save for half) to any creature
within 10 feet of the patch. Fulgurate mushrooms are instantly destroyed
when they release their lightning blast.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Lair of the Fungus Druid
The Fungus Druid Angus Sallow, or at least what's
left of him, lives in an underground greenhouse called the Mushroom Grotto.
The complex has a central circular chamber and six 50-foot-long spokes
radiating outward into the damp earth. A central pool of clear water is filled
with clinging vines of ivy and wet, spongy plants. Moss and mushrooms grow in
solitude in the side halls. Each hall is lit by the soft blue glow of
phosphorescent lichens that grow along the walls and across the ceiling in
a cascade of color.  Planting boxes contain draping streamers of wild azalea
dappled with yellow moss. At the entry of each dead-end tunnel is a row of
small planters set on the floor, each containing a small patch of fulgurate
mushrooms. The

Fungus Druid (see the Fungoid entry) can safely walk through these boxes
without triggering their explosive properties.  Anyone else won’t be so lucky.
The repercussion of the blasts alerts the Fungus Druid to intruders, and
summons his companion, a moss-covered shambling mound that rises out of the
central pool.

Fungoid
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 slams (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Resists electricity, immune to charm
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

sealed tube containing a scroll with plant growth written on it, and six
flower-shaped garnets (50 gp each).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

A fungoid resembles a 6-foot-tall, stocky and powerful humanoid
formed of mushroom flesh. Coloration varies from brownish-green or
brown to dark green mottled with brown splotches. It weighs about
300 pounds. A fungoid's facial features are discernible, but rough. Its
arms end in powerful hands. Fungoids rush into combat swinging their
powerful fists. They take half damage from electricity and are immune
to charms.

A Fungi to Be With
In a nook just off his garden greenhouse (see the Fulgurate Mushroom
entry), the Fungus Druid Angus Sallow rests in a bower of damp earth.
After years of growing exotic plants, Angus’ body is covered by the fungi
he prefers. More mushroom now than man, Angus is now a fungoid, a
mushroom behemoth with a limited intelligence whose sole intent is to
protect his garden and the species of plants it contains.
The Fungus Druid sleeps in a three-foot-tall mound of wet earth and
fertilizer bounded by oaken sideboards. Mushrooms poke through this
dirt layer, their caps tilted to the blue phosphorescent light of glowing
lichens lining the walls. Angus rises out of the dirt pile if anyone bothers
his plants or mushrooms. Fulgurate mushrooms grow on the Fungus
Druid's broad back, so that any PC striking Angus has a 2 in 6 chance
of setting off a concussive blast of lightning. Angus’ companion, a
shambling mound, rests in a pool of clear water nearby. Angus calls on
the shambling mound once he rises out of his earthen bower.
Buried in the rich loam is a +1 mace carved like a blooming rose, a

Fye
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: Incorporeal touch (1d6 + possession)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Aura of despair, possession, magical abilities
Move: 24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A fye resembles a translucent humanoid whose face is contorted and
twisted as if frozen in an eternal scream. The fye is about 6 feet tall, and
its lower torso tapers off around the knees into vaporous nothingness. Its
face always has the appearance that the creature is screaming or howling
though it never utters any sound. A fye continually emanates an aura of
despair in a 10-foot radius that causes creatures to suffer a -2 penalty
on attacks and saves (save resists). Once per round, a fye can attempt to
possess an opponent with a successful touch attack (as per the magic jar
spell, except it doesn’t require a receptacle). At will, a fye can cast ESP;
three times per day it can cast cause fear; and once per day it can cast
feeblemind.

Cold at Heart
A granite statue of a nondescript woman stands among a dozen
corpses. A glimmering heart-shaped amethyst adorns her bare
chest, the gem bathing the room in soft purplish light. The dead in
the room appear to have died from self-inflicted wounds. Most tore
out their eyes while others carved into their chests with their own
daggers. The corpses are a mixture of humans and goblin-kind. All of
the deceased face the statue, kneeling in a semicircle in front of it.
An epitaph is inscribed in the stone floor at the statue's base. It reads:
“Faen Tiensa: Heart weeps, age befall old, Tears become red. Life with
no reason grows cold. Love gone, dead.” This is the tomb of Faen Tiensa,
the beloved wife of Glaeran the Faithful. Glaeran was a high priest who
had more devotion to his spouse than his own deity. The deity cursed
Glaeran to an existence as a fye tied to this monument to his wife. The
heart-shaped amethyst serves as an anchor for the fye's eternal existence.
Once destroyed, the fye's spirit is set free.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Fyr
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: head butt (1d4+1) or 1 weapon (1d6+1)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Spell-like abilities
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A fyr is a 3-foot tall, goat-headed humanoid with large
slightly-backward-curved horns, goat-like legs, a small bushy
tail, and a human torso. Its entire body, except its arms and hands,
is covered in thick brown fur. Fyrs often adorn their body with
rings, necklaces, bracelets, earrings, and other such trinkets. A fyr
attacks by butting with its horns, but some use weapons. A fyr can use
various spell-like abilities: at will—speak with animals; 4/day—charm
monster; 3/day—warp wood; 1/day—plant doorway.

Nothing to Fear
The delicate chimes of elaborate spiraling wind chimes fill the air with
a trilling melody. Nearly 30 fantastic creations hang from the limbs of a
willow tree near the dirt path. Sitting in the middle of a blanket spread
under the tree is a fierce-looking fyr. Anghus has large horns wrapped in
spiraling bands of silver and platinum. Spread on the carpet are dozens
of finely crafted rings, jewelry boxes, pendants, broaches, scroll tubes
and necklaces. A small sign supported by a stick in the ground says “For
Sale.”
Anghus sells hand-crafted jewelry. Every piece sparkles a dazzling
hue of colors when held up to the light. The jewels are incredibly cheap,
despite their incredible beauty.
The fyr was cursed nearly a year ago by Egrella Grul, a vile annis, so
that every piece of jewelry he sells brings bad luck to the buyer. The rings
draw all spells cast (by friend or foe) toward the wearer. The broaches
choke the life from the wearer while he sleeps. The scroll tubes fill with
blood every morning, ruining anything kept within. The Game Referee is
free to make up any other curses to inflict on PCs buying the fyr's wares.
The only way to stop the curse is to drop the cursed items into the
muddy waters of the Sin Mire Swamp. The fyr knows of the bad luck
following his items, but hopes to one day find someone to face the wicked
hag, who makes her home in a gigantic rotten tree.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Gallows Tree
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 6 slams (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Create gallows tree zombies, grab, +1 magic weapons to hit, resists fire
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

A gallows tree is a 20-foot-tall tree with 6 or more humanoids hanging from its branches, each
tightly secured by their necks with greenish-brown ropes. The gallows tree's canopy is thick and
bushy, and its trunk is formed of leathery bark, mottled brown. Gallows trees sustain themselves
on the internal organs and body fluids of living creatures. Gallows trees lower zombies to the
ground when prey comes within 100 feet of the tree. Foes that get within 15 feet are struck by
the tree's sharp branches. If two or more branches hit the same opponent, he is held and takes
2d6 points of damage automatically each round as the tree pummels him. The tree slices open
victims for their organs, then fills them with a greenish sap that turns them into gallows tree
zombies. The newly created undead rises in 1d4 days. A typical gallows tree has 6-11 gallows
tree zombies hanging from it at any given time.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Gallows Tree Zombie
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 slams (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Spore cloud, tether-vine, regenerate 2 hp/round
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Gallows tree zombies are humanoid creatures with deathly gray-green skin that feels coarse
and rough to the touch. Their clothes are tattered and torn, and some still wear the armor they
wore in life (though it is now rusted, dented, or damaged). Many have small plants, weeds, or
fungi growing on or from their bodies. A long, sinewy cord of greenish-brown wraps around the
zombie's throat and connects it to a gallows tree. Gallows tree zombies hang motionless from
the tree that created them, being lowered to the ground only when a living creature comes within
100 feet of the gallows tree they are connected to. Once every 1d4 rounds but no more than 3
times per day, a gallows tree zombie can breathe a cloud of poisonous spores. Anyone caught in
the spore cloud must make a save or be slowed (as per the slow spell). Gallows trees zombies
regenerate 2 hp per round as long as they remain connected to their tree by their tethervine. The vine allows the zombie to move up to 100 feet away from the tree.

The Tree Cult
A thick fog rolls through the dense forest, obscuring the vines and thorny underbrush. The thick
canopy overhead blocks the morning sun, the interlocking branches forming a natural ceiling.
A massive tree stands in the middle of a small clearing, its heavy branches arching outward
to intermingle with the elms and oaks surrounding it. The thick foliage weeps with dripping
condensation. Thick strands of green vines hang from the branches, each nearly touching the ground.
Swaying rhythmically beneath the gnarled and twisted tree are five robed human figures
standing in a circle around a goat-like being perched atop a wood-and-bark altar. A curtain of
vines surrounds the worshippers. The five humans bow deeply to the goat-like being, then raise
their hands high above their heads. The satyr capers on the altar. The scene is eerily silent.
The massive tree is a gallows tree, while the five figures and the satyr are gallows tree
zombies suspended by vines and manipulated like puppets to lure strangers closer to the tree's
base. The altar is a natural formation of roots and rocks.
The gallows tree attacks with vines as it unleashes the robed zombies. It also holds two more
zombies in the branches overhead and drops them down among opponents once it attacks.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Gambado
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (1d8), 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Surprise on roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A gambado makes its lair in a 6-foot deep pit. It hides its body with
rocks, leaves and anything else in the surrounding area, allowing only
its head to be seen. Beneath the leaves, the gambado is a human-sized
creature with a cylindrical torso. Two long arms ending in razor-sharp
claws protrude from the body. Its torso ends in three long, single-toed
feet. Its body is gray in color and leathery and can be compressed like a
spring. This is its primary means of locomotion. By compressing its body,
the gambado can spring up or forward.
Gambado are solitary creatures by nature, and on the rare occasion that
more than one is encountered, each will have its own lair and pit from
which it attacks. The pits are usually close together to maximize their
attacks on creatures within the area. Any treasure collected by a gambado
is stored on its pit floor or in a small and well-hidden hole in the side of
its pit. It is unknown whether gambados can communicate or speak any
languages.

Credit: The Gambado originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Simon
Shaw.

Halfling Mysticism
You come across a plain of heliotropes studded with dozens of large
stone heads, representation of obscure gods and goddesses. Atop each
head there is a halfling mystic in a state of deep meditation, naked save
for a loinclout. The area is inhabited by 1d4+1 gambado dwelling in their
pits, the pits covered by woven grasses and flowers. The gambado prey
on visitors to the halfling mystics, who pay no attention to the plight of
the pilgrims.
Each halfling owns a single jewel worth 500 gp that it hides beneath
its sculpted seat. With these jewels, each halfling can grant a single
wish made on behalf of another. Upon granting such a wish, the jewel
disappears in a great flash of light and the halfling is reduced to a pile
of ashes, a ravenous gambado left in its place. Violence directed against
a halfling results in its stone head rising from the ground to attack as a
stone guardian (q.v.). These stone guardians are finely sculpted, but are
far more powerful than they initially appear.

GARGOYLES

Several different varieties of gargoyles exist, and each is detailed below. For all their differences, they
do share some common traits. They prefer to remain still and then suddenly attack or dive into their prey.
Green guardians attempt to hold their victims and then fly off with them. A group of margoyles and/or gargoyles
works in unison to bring down their opponents.

Gargoyle, Four-Armed
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4+1
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: 4 claws (1d4), bite (1d6), gore (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: +1 or better weapon to hit, freeze
Move: 15/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 6/400

Four-armed gargoyles have a great fondness for inflicting pain on their
foes. When a four-armed gargoyle has the upper hand in battle, it often
draws out the conflict as long as it can in order to deal as much pain and
suffering as it can on its foes.

Credit: The Four-Armed Gargoyle first appeared in the First Edition module S1
Tomb of Horrors (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1978) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original material by Gary Gygax.

Forewarned is Fore-Armed
To the sound of a beating drum, a pleasure galley traverses a narrow straight,
the walls of which are covered in friezes of elegant gentlemen and ladies
dancing a minuet. The galley is defended by 10 archers (chainmail, longbow,
short sword) and 20 ballestieri (leather armor, sling, short sword) and
carries a noble wedding party. The party consists of a baronet and his fiance,
the daughter of a duke, as well as eight knights and dames and a multitude of
servants.

Lurking atop the cliff is a wicked count who desires the lady for himself. To
obtain her, he has summoned forth a wing of 1d12+4 four-armed gargoyles using
a magical gong. The gong is made of a strange black metal that absorbs light
and sound, but when struck sends vibrations through the aether and summons
forth all monsters within 1 mile. The four-armed gargoyles usually dwell on
the ledges of the massive frieze, appearing to be grotesque demons flitting
over the heads of the dancers.

The gargoyles are to slay the baronet, seize the lady and bring her to the
count, who has a fast horse tied to a scraggly apple tree. Unfortunately, the
gargoyles are not under the command of the count and are apt to do as they
will.

Gargoyle, Fungus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: fungus breath, stench
Move: 14/18 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A fungus gargoyle stands about 6 feet tall and weighs up to 200 pounds
and looks like it is carved from molds, fungi and mushrooms. Every
1d4 rounds, a fungus gargoyles can breathe a 30-foot cone of fungus
particles that causes 1d6 points of damage to any opponent who inhales
the substance (a successful saving throw keeps the fungi particles from
taking root in the windpipe). A fungus gargoyle also exudes a horrible
stench in a 10-foot-wide cloud around it that causes those who get too
near it to spend the next round retching if they fail a saving throw.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original

Credit: The Fungus Gargoyle originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Ergot Egotism
On the outskirts of the town of Alemint lies a prosperous barley farm
with an exceedingly tall and abundant crop. The giant fields of barley
stand taller than a man and conceal the farm. A narrow road leads through
the fields to the farmhouse and barns. A druid has sublet the farm from
the Oberlyn family. The “druid” Rhawtin Omphalotus is actually a cleric
(8th level) of the Cult of Rachiss (a demigod of parasites). Rhawtin seeks
to bring about the downfall of civilization through the spread of parasites,
leeching fungi and virulent plagues. Rhawtin (following the teachings

of Rachiss) wants nature to reclaim modern cultures through malicious
activities and biological acts of terrorism.
Rhawtin and his gang of 6 infected gargoyles spread a fungal pestilence
throughout the barley crops that makes the ale and other brews mildly
toxic. In addition to fungus gargoyles, Rhawtin has planted several
guards such as gas spores, shriekers and violet fungi around the barley
field. He carries a magical egg that creates swarms of giant mosquitoes
when it is broken.

Gargoyle, Green Guardian
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice:     4+1
Armor Class:  3 [16]
Attack:       2 claws (1d4), bite (1d6), gore (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: +1 or better weapon to hit, freeze, hold, reanimation
Move:        15/24 (flying)
Alignment:   Chaos
CL/XP:       8/800

Green guardian gargoyles are carved of a strange green stone and have two eyes
of jet (500 gp each). The eyes radiate magic and evil if detected.  If a green
guardian gargoyle hits an opponent with both claw attacks, that opponent must
succeed on a saving throw or be held for 4 rounds as if by a hold person
spell. Unlike the hold person spell, a held creature does not receive a new
save each round to break the effects. A green guardian gargoyle that has been
killed reanimates in 1d8+2 days at full strength unless its eye gems are
crushed and disenchanted with both dispel magic and remove curse.

Credit: Green Guardian Gargoyles can be found in the Necromancer Games module Rappan Athuk I: The
Upper Levels (©2000 Bill Webb and Clark Peterson, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original

Gods of the Pillars
The main square of the little village by the oasis is dominated by a tall
pillar topped by a sculpture of a ram-headed man. The pillar is composed
of granite and clad in brass, and bathes the square in golden light while
the sun shines. The sculpture is composed of malachite and has two eyes
of jet worth 500 gp each. The pillar rises 20 feet above ground level, but
is actually set in a 20-foot deep well filled with cool water. The well is 7
feet in diameter, the pillar 3 feet in diameter.

A trio of priests, their heads shaved, their faces painted black, armed
with scourges and wicker urns, harrangue the crowds that move through
the square, demanding offerings of food for themselves and riches for the
god of the pillar, lest he descend and destroy them. Adventurers might be
tempted to ignore the obnoxious priests, who apparently have no magical
powers and are too cowardly to put up any kind of fight. If they do, they
are visited that night by the green guardian gargoyle who stands atop the
pillar. Should it succeed in gaining its revenge, their heads decorate the
edge of the well the next day.

Gargoyle, Margoyle
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6+1
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack: 2 claws (1d6), bite (1d6), gore (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: +1 or better weapon to hit, freeze
Move: 15/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 8/800

A margoyle is a slightly larger version of the standard gargoyle. It is
meaner, more wicked, and deadlier than its smaller kin. Margoyles are
most often encountered in subterranean regions and often have a pack of
gargoyles with them. In such cases, the margoyle is looked upon as the
master or leader of the group.

Credit: The Margoyle originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost Caverns
of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition
Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission. It was called the “Marlgoyle” in S4 (note the extra “l”).

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original

The Wizard of Babble's Safe Haven
You come across a strange, subterranean vault entered via one of three
barred doors. In the middle of the room, which is furnished with Persianstyle rugs, pillows of damask silk stuffed with goose down and a small,
ebony table upon which rests an ornate hookah worth 1,200 gp.
Sitting before the hookah is a grinning skeleton, smoke curling up
through its eye sockets. The skeleton is wearing silk robes and a tall turban
of amethyst satin adorned with peacock feathers. On the skeleton's finger
is a copper ring engraved with the word “Srijkaunsh”, which magic-users
might recognize as the name of a celebrated wizard famous for a lost spell
that caused people to speak gibberish (actually the reverse of a tongues
spell).

The walls of the vault are sculpted in the form of eight ugly, horned,
winged demons standing on the backs of elephants and apparently
holding up the ceiling. The sculptures are gargoyles - specifically, two
margoyles and six gargoyles. The skeleton is animated, but only to draw
people into the chamber, not to fight. Should people sit down next to the
skeleton, it holds out a copper bowl. An offering of a gemstone is taken
in the skeleton's fingers and held aloft, at which point a monkey wriggles
through the bars of one of the exits, takes the stone, and capers away.
The offering placates the gargoyles and make the room a safe haven for
the adventurers for the remainder of the day. At midnight, however, they
are ushered out of the room by a stinging wind (save or suffer 1d4 points
of damage per round).


Gas Spore
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
From a distance greater than 10 feet, the gas spore is likely to be
mistaken for a beholder (1 in 6 chance to notice the difference). T The gas
spore has a fly speed of 10 feet with average maneuverability.
When a gas spore contacts a living creature (or a living creature touches a
gas spore unarmed or with natural attacks), it injects poisonous rhizomes into
the foe if that opponent fails a saving throw. Each day thereafter, an infected
creature must succeed on a saving throw (-1 cumulative penalty per day) or
take 1d6 points of damage. Damage continues until the victim dies or the
rhizomes are destroyed. At 0 hp, a victim dies and 2d4 gas spores
emerge from its body. A cure disease spell cast on an affected creature before
it dies destroys the rhizomes and prevents any further damage.
If a gas spore is struck for a single point of damage (by a weapon,
natural attack, spell, or effect), it explodes in a violent blast of gas that
deals 6d6 points of damage to all creatures within a 30-foot radius. A
successful saving throw reduces the damage by half.

Gas Attack
A large, circular cavern (100 feet in diameter) with a funnel-shaped floor
serves as the breeding ground for almost 100 gas spores. The spores float
through the room aimlessly, sewing their spores in the bodies of the dead
creatures that are thrown into the cavern by the denizens of the dungeon.

Credit: The Gas Spore originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Gelid Beetle (Greater)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d6 + 1d8 cold)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Cold, cold cloud, immune to cold
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

Greater gelid beetles are larger, meaner versions of the standard gelid
beetle. They are almost always hungry and are usually encountered while
hunting. Gelid beetles bite opponents, delivering cold damage with each
hit. Once per minute, a gelid beetle can emit a cloud of ice cold vapors
in a 20-foot radius around its body that deals 2d6 cold damage (save for
half) to creatures caught within it. The cloud lasts for 1d4+3 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Icy Death
A large cave opens into the edge of the Wailing Glacier, the opening
a dark hole that slopes down from the frozen landscape. The cave is the
lair of Belthorin the Ice Bellower, a monstrous white dragon that has
terrorized the land for nearly three decades. Giant icicles hang from
the rocky opening, and the cave beyond descends at a steep 60-degree
angle. The 100-foot-long slope is coated with a thick sheet of ice, so
any PC climbing down may instead go rocketing into a large circular
chamber filled with frozen stalactites.

Belthorin lies coiled in the center of the chamber, the white dragon's body
resting on a low ice ledge. The dragon's head faces the tunnel entry. Its eyes
are closed.  Belthorin has been dead for six weeks now, hollowed out from the
inside by a colony of gelid beetles that ate into the soft belly of the infirm
dragon while it slept. Two greater gelid beetles guard a clutch of eggs inside
the white dragon's innards, while 12 recently hatched lesser beetles climb
about the dragon's ice lair. The young beetles attack with their cold spray,
while the larger beetles use their cold cloud to freeze attackers.

Gelid Beetle (Lesser)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d4 + 1d4 cold)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Cold, cold spray, immune to cold
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Gelid beetles appear as stark white beetles with silvery-black legs and dull
silver mandibles. Some specimens have a mottled silver or black carapace and
an even rarer species has dull crimson wing covers. Gelid beetles have two
sets of eyes equally spaced on their heads dull silveryblack in color. Gelid
beetles bite opponents, delivering cold damage with each hit. Once per day,
a gelid beetle can release a spray in a 10-foot cone that deals 2d4 cold
damage (save for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Genie, Abasheen
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 slams (1d10+1)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Spell-like abilities, whirlwind
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

An abasheen stands about 8 feet tall and is always dressed in flowing
robes colored to denote their current station. Their skin is dark and their
build powerful. All have dark hair, either black or brown, and most wear
their hair braided or pulled into a ponytail, tied with ribbons of gold or
silver. They are akin to genie nobility and act the part. Abasheens slam
opponents with their powerful fists and employ their spell-like abilities in
combat: at will—charm person; 1/day—quest. An abasheen can turn itself
into a whirlwind much like an air elemental, sweeping away creatures
with one or fewer hit dice (the diameter of the whirlwind is 20 ft.)

Copyright Notice: Authors Lance and Travis Hawvermale.

Sultan's Pleasure Palace
Sitting quietly on the grassy plain is a grand nomadic tent. The
flamboyant yak-wool tent looks like it belongs to royalty. Two muscular
eunuch guards (5th-level Fighters) stand beside an open door flap that
leads into the massive tent. They wield large curved scimitars (same
damage as two-handed swords) and wear polished plate armor. Their
tongues have been cut out, so they communicate with stern gestures
and guttural grunts. They allow visitors to enter the tent if shown proper
respect and permission is asked. The pavilion belongs to an abasheen
genie named Khilafah al Abbasid. The tent itself is a magical creation
that has many more rooms inside than possible. In fact, the open flap
leads into an extra-dimensional space. The interior is a maze of veils, tent
walls, corridors and extravagant rooms. The tent walls are immovable
and unforgiving.

The woolen tent's sides have the consistency of iron, although it feels
soft and cloth-like. If torn or destroyed, the tent evaporates, leaving all
occupants sitting on the desert sand. The tent's center pole is a plain ash
pole that holds the tent together. Once destroyed, the tent dissipates and
all occupants and prisoners are set free. While in the pocket dimension
tent, time ceases. Inhabitants do not need to eat or sleep, although they
can do so if they desire. They do not age or contract disease, although
poisons still work. Khilafah al Abbasid, an abasheen genie, controls the
tent and can gate it to other places and planes by grasping the main pole
and stating his destination.

The great Khilafah al Abbasid has wandered the planes for millennia.
Khilafah al Abbasid has a unique passion among djinn-kind: He collects
living creatures, in particular only the most desirable females of various
intelligent species. He considers his harem a collection only, and allows
nothing to disgrace or harm his beloved possessions. While Khilafah al
Abbasid has fed his obsession for ages, his extreme prejudice and stringent
standards severely limit who he accepts into his harem. Currently, there
are fewer than 30 harem girls within the tent prison. The harem slaves are
well-read, literate in many languages and have fantastic artistic talents
(such as dancing, painting and musical abilities). Prisoners for centuries,
there is little else for them to do except learn new skills. They are bored
and show great fascination with males of any species.

Many eunuch guards protect the tent the palace pavilion. These guards
are replaced often as the temptations within the tent are great and
punishment by Khilafah al Abbasid is severe. Khilafah al Abbasid slays
any guard who displeases him or soiled members of his harem. Khilafah
always needs quality guards, but the job has horrific requirements, the first
requiring the men be – or become -- eunuchs. In addition to the harem and
guards, Khilafah particularly enjoys the company of noblemen, scholars
and others of the genie races. He takes great pride in his harem and enjoys
showing the women off to well-mannered visitors.

Genie, Hawanar
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 4 [17]
Attacks: 2 fists (1d8 + fire)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Magical abilities, immune to fire, fiery cyclone
Move: 10/16 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

Hawanar are 12-feet-tall genies whose lower torsos are shrouded in a
cyclone of flame. A hawanar can create food and water as well as wooden
and cloth objects. They can create metal objects (including coins), but all
such magically created metals disappear in time. Hawanar can become
invisible at will and can create realistic illusions that disappear when
touched. Finally, a hawanar can turn into a flaming whirlwind that sweeps
away creatures with one or fewer hit dice and deals 1d6 points of fire
damage. (The diameter of the whirlwind is 10 feet.) Some hawanars can
grant true wishes. A hawanar's attacks cause flammable materials to burst
into flame.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Torchbearer of Bad News
Merdle Grunny has been a lackey and torchbearer for nearly 60 years.
Mistreated and underpaid by countless adventurers, he dislikes their kind
and talks bitterly of being exploited. Forever down on his luck thanks to
cheap alcohol and friendly companions, he was forced to take on ever
more dangerous jobs in the hope of cashing in on the goodwill of generous
treasure-seeking adventurers. Grunny carried torches and equipment into
forgotten tombs, into catacombs filled with foul goblins and through
primeval forests laden with fiends. He always ended up lugging out heavy
burdens of plunder.

And what did he get for his efforts? A few meager coins that quickly
vanished. Grunny always tells his drinking buddies how he's the only
reason many expeditions came back at all. In truth, Grunny survived
through dumb luck and by cowering behind adventurers. He didn’t escape
unscathed, though. Disfiguring scars mar his face and hands, and he has
developed twitchy mannerisms that make him jump at the slightest noise.
His last haul was different, though: With his employers (mostly) dead
in a sandy tomb, Grunny happened upon a jewel-encrusted brass torch.
Looking to be the envy of his torchbearer colleagues, he pocketed the
torch and fled the tomb, leaving his employers to their doom.

It was only after lighting the torch that he discovered its terrible power.
The torch is the prison of a powerful hawanar genie named Anta’ Falegha.
Hateful and cruel, she serves the person holding the torch resentfully.
Once lit, Anta’ Falegha erupts from the torch in a swirling column of
flame and destruction. Cunning and wise, Merdle Grunny has yet to
request any wishes from the genie. After discovering the limited duration
of the hawanar genie's created coin, he devised a scheme to obtain a more
permanent source of wealth. Using his skills as a torchbearer and hired
laborer, he accompanies adventurers and releases Anta’ Falegha when
they are fighting for their lives. He steals their treasures and leaves them
to their fate.

Genie, Marid
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 fists (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Magical abilities, whirlpool
Move: 10/16 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A marid is a blue genie standing about 16 feet tall and weighing nearly
2,500 pounds. These powerful beings can transform into a maelstrom in
water to carry creatures and objects away. This watery cyclone overturns
small boats and sinks larger vessels in 1d4+4 rounds. Marids also can
rise out of the ocean to attack ships, and will batter vessels to pieces
within 1 hour if not prevented or distracted. A marid can turn invisible,
polymorph self, create water and control water at will. Some marids can
grant limited wishes.

Credit: The Marid originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Tides of war
Defying gravity, a castle made of water steadily floats atop the sea.
The castle's surfaces remain stationary, but the sea that makes up the
walls flows in abnormal patterns. The seawater flows up from the base
of the outer wall to the very peaks and then turns inward to form the
interior surfaces while dropping back into the depths. The walls act just
like water, but characters attempting to pass through the liquid curtain
find themselves violently tossed around and unable to control their
direction or destination. Unfortunate marine life crowds the 10-foot-thick
walls as the castle sucks them up through the outer walls, hurls them
throughout the inner walls and violently plunges them back into the sea
at the castle's center. Even more mysterious, the floor and stairs of the
watery citadel remain eternally frozen and support weight. There are no
doors or windows into the citadel. The castle is filled with plunder from
the sea protected by guards such as sea giants and giant squids that reach
through the walls, and sharks that leap from one wall to another through
the middle of rooms.

This is the sea fortress of Majnoon al Kali, a powerful marid genie
who has ambitions of ruling the oceans. Only Majnoon can control the
slow and unstoppable movement of the castle (which can also submerge
after trapping air in its internal rooms). The sea citadel collapses upon
his death, sending all its continents into the ocean. Majnoon currently
has his sights set on a merman city that lies off the coast near the city of
Bargarsport.

Geon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 slams (2d8+2)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Animate boulders, spell-like abilities, vulnerable to
cold, immune to fire and electricity
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A geon appears as a large, boulder-like creature, though similar in a
way to xorn. They have two large legs and feet, which also act as hands,
allowing the geon to manipulate items with them. Two large recesses
on its surface function as eyes. A geon has a large, wide mouth. Geons
animate boulders to attack its foes and create walls of stone to contain
them. The geon can animate any rocks within 180 feet at will, and can
control up to two rocks at a time. Boulders (Move 6) fight as geons in
all respects. Geons can: 1/day--move earth, passwall, transmute rock to
mud, wall of stone. Geons are vulnerable to cold and take one-and-ahalf damage. They take half damage (or none if they save) from fire and
electricity.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson.

A Rolling Stone Gathers Moss
An extremely pungent moss called Sylvan's Beard grows near the top
of the steep slopes of the Enta Hillside, just outside a low stone cave of
battered rocks set into the dirt. The entire hillock is covered in fragrant
wildflowers and tall weeds. Thirty-foot-long muddy strips are torn through
the flora. Ten 10-foot-tall boulders walk up the hillside in shambling gaits
on short, stubby legs, all slipping and sliding on the steep hillside.
A geon tasked with protecting the moss was thrown out of its home
(literally) by a drunken cave giant. The geon cared little about the cave,
but animated the many boulders in the area to follow it up the hill to help
guard the moss. But every morning, the giant stumbles out of the cave and
tosses the rocks back down the hill where they bounce and spin, taking
out trees and tearing up the dirt.
The geon needs help running the giant out of its cave. The animated
boulders aren’t doing any good (and just provide the giant with
ammunition to throw). The geon is extremely thankful if PCs help return
it to its post, but not so happy if they try to take any of the moss it protects.
(See the Giant, Cave entry to continue this encounter.)

Ghoul, Cinder
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d8 + 1d6 fire + level drain)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Drains 1 level with hit, fire
Move: 12 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A cinder ghoul is ghost-like spirit in the form of a swirling humanoid cloud
of burning ash and charred body parts. Its dark, smoky shape is lit here and
there with the red glow of perpetually burning embers, and the grisly remains
of scorched body parts can occasionally be glimpsed floating within the mass.
These baleful undead creatures reek of smoke and burnt flesh. A cinder ghoul's
touch drains 1 level. Any creature struck by the ghoul's vicious touch also
suffers 1d6 fire damage and must save or catch on fire.

Ashes of Vengeance
A blackened 5-foot-wide dais sits outside a cave
constructed of perfectly fitted blocks of black glass.
A 10-foot-diameter sheet of charred glass encircles the
dais. Gold-colored sigils are carved into the stone dais and
flame-like petroglyphs are etched into the glass sheet. The
head of a fire giant sits on the altar. The top of the giant's
head has been removed and filled with burning oil. A
garish blue flame leaps upward from the severed head.
The area around the altar smells of burning hair and flesh.
Two small brass bowls filled with ash and bone fragments
sit alongside the burning head.
The priests of the fire maiden Incindreia routinely
sacrifice victims by setting them on fire. The bowls of ash
contain the collected remains of a married pair of clerics caught
by the wicked priests while on their honeymoon. The spirits of
the clerics now rise as cinder ghouls from the brass bowls in a
swirl of ash and bone fragments to attack anyone approaching
the altar.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Ghoul, Dust
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d4)
Special: Animate dust, paralyzing shriek
Move: 10/6/4 (flying/burrow)
Saving Throw: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Dust ghouls are dust-covered creatures with decaying flesh pulled
tightly over their humanoid frames. Their teeth are pointed fangs and
their hands end in wicked, dirt-covered and blood-soaked claws. Once
per round, a dust ghoul can emit a hellish shriek that paralyzes any
creature within 60 feet for 2d4 rounds if they fail a save. Once per day,
a dust ghoul can animate 11d4 dust zombies. These zombies cannot be
harmed by spells or weapons, but a gallon of water destroys them. The
dust zombies attack with the ghouls to-hit bonus, but do no damage. If
two hit the same opponent, they hold the creature immobile. Dust ghouls
are immune to charms and sleep spells.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Casey Christofferson.

Paupers’ Grave
A large stone-lined pit stretches across this room (or field), with corpses
in various states of decay strewn across a rusted iron mesh grate. The pit
drops 20 feet to the grate and 30 more to the floor of the pit below that. A
fine coating of lye covers the corpses, and half a barrel of lye and a shovel
sit next to the pit. An empty vial (that used to contain unholy water) can
be found buried in the barrel of lye. The lye causes chemical burns to any
exposed skin (1d4 points of damage per round until washed off).
The dust from centuries of corpses fills the floor of the pit beneath the
mesh grate. Only coins, rings and other small valuables belonging to the
dead filter through the grate. The grate sits on a rock ledge running around
the interior of the pit. Lifting the grate is difficult due to its weight and
precise fit. A dust ghoul rests below in the mound of ash at the bottom of
the hole. It animates the remains into zombies before attacking.

Ghoul-Stirge
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4+1
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d6 plus parlaysis)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Blood drain, paralysis
Move: 9/18 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A ghoul-stirge resembles a large stirge with rotting flesh and broken wings.
The origin of the ghoul-stirge has been lost, but it is believed to be the
result of a failed magical experiment conducted in ages past by a group of
evil and insane necromancers. Though they can generally be encountered
anywhere, ghoul-stirges seem to favor desolate places such as ruins and
caverns or dungeons deep underground. Being undead they do not have to eat,
but seem to draw sustenance from the blood of enemies, much like a vampire.

Those hit by a ghoul-stirge's bite attack must succeed on a saving throw or be
paralyzed for 1d6+2 rounds. A ghoul-stirge can drain blood from a paralyzed or
pinned opponent. Each round it deals 2d4 points of damage each round. Once the
ghoul-stirge has dealt 8 points of damage, it flies off to digest its meal. If
its victim dies before the ghoul-stirge's appetite has been sated, the
creature detaches and seeks a new target.

Credit: The Ghoulstirge originally appeared in the First Edition module L1 The
Secret of Bone Hill (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Lenard Lakofka.

Comfortless Inn
A crumbling two-story coaching inn on the road between two rival citystates is called home by a gang of 1d3+1 ghoul-stirges. The ghoul-stirges
dwell in the attic, the scene of a terrible fire that claimed the life of two
smugglers who now haunt the grounds as poltergeists. One poltergeist
dwells in the stable, throwing about horse shoes, whips, harnesses,
brushes and other tools. The other dwells in the taproom, where he has
pewter mugs and cuttlery to play with.
A monstrous large cask is embedded in one wall, the tap being the
handle to a secret door if turned counter-clockwise three times. The cask
holds smuggler's loot, mostly furs, pelts and horns taken from wisent that
dwelled in the king's forest. The ghoul-stirges are only active at night
or on cloudy days. They prefer to attack people in the open, where their
flight ability can be used to its full effect.

Giant, Bronze
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12+1d6
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: Sword (6d6)
Special: hurl boulders, sardonic laugh
Move: 15
Saving Throw: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A bronze giant is huge muscular being often mistaken for a statue of
the gods. It is well proportioned and has flesh that gleams like polished
bronze and hair the color of copper wire. Bronze giants stand about 25
feet tall and weigh about 14,000 pounds. A bronze giant can unleash a
bellowing laugh that strikes fear (save negates) into the hearts of any
creature within 100 feet that hears it. They throw rocks for 6d6 points of
damage.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Casey Christofferson.

Garden of the Gods
Deep within the Hollow Spire Mountains stands Mount Alluvial,
a mountain encircled by fantastic rock formations. Phosphorescent
evergreens, enormous ferns, blooming vines and gigantic flowers are
dwarfed by colossal rock formations. Paved paths meander though the
otherworldly garden. Titanic bronze and rock statues decorate the garden.
These unique statues resemble the gods of the lands. These statues are
the works of Alaxias, a bronze giant, who is said to wield a bronze shield
with the image of the three Gorgons emblazoned on its face. The shield
reportedly has the power to turn opponents to bronze or stone. Alaxias
has served the will of the gods and man for centuries. Wealthy high
priests seek out his skill and knowledge to sculpt statues of their deities
to decorate their temples. Mages travel great distances to commission
golems and other animated beings. The garden also contains golems,
clockwork creations and other constructed creatures that wander freely or
stand like magnificent statues until disturbed.
Alaxias does not welcome uninvited guests or treasure-seekers. The
grounds are protected by a pack of chaotic, intelligent wolves. The large
wolves have coats of silvery metallic fur that are reputed to reverse flesh
to stone once skinned and tanned.

Giant, Cave
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9+1d6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: weapon (2d8) or slam (1d8)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Cave giants are the dumber, stronger cousins of hill giants. A cave
giant is a massive creature, stocky and pot-bellied, with black scraggly
hair streaming down over its shoulders. The skin of a cave giant is gray,
mottled here and there with blotches of brown and black. The face of a
cave giant has a bulbous nose between glaring eyes with thick, bushy
eyebrows. A cave giant has two tusk-like teeth that extend down over its
lower lip, causing it to drool almost constantly. Cave giants don’t throw
rocks, but instead try to grab victims and pound them into the ground,
ceiling or any nearby objects.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley.

Return Deposit
The cave giant Creel Rockcrusher has found the perfect cave. It sits high
on a hill, a perfect vantage point to see his enemies (he's sure they’re out
there), and is surrounded by a red-colored moss that smells like rotting
goat, Creel's favorite. Creel just had to clear out a few boulders in and
around the cavern.
But the rocks came back the next morning, sitting right outside the
entry to the cave. The rocks are animated boulders led by a geon. Creel
unceremoniously tossed the geon out of the cave. The geon sits at the base
of the hill, directing the boulders up the hill each day.
Creel's limited intellect is further hindered by the moss growing
all around him. The moss, called Sylvan's Beard, gives off a highly
intoxicating spores that can cause euphoria. Creel is in a drunk-like
stupor most days, and the moving rocks are a nightmare taking root in his
delusional and paranoid mind. He sees them as trying to get into his cave
(they are, by the way) and kill him in his sleep (they’re not).
The cave giant charges out of its cave and grabs any boulders in reach
to smash into PCs who might side with the geon. (See the Geon entry for
more from this encounter.)

Giant, Ferrous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12+1d6
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 weapon (4d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spell-like abilities, immune to fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

Ferrous giant stand 20 feet tall and have dark ruddy skin. They wear
their hair long and most males are bearded. Hair color ranges from brown
to black. Their eyes are typically brown, hazel, or green. Common dress
consists of furs, skins, or armor. Ferrous giants grab opponents and pound
them into the ground, ceiling or any nearby objects. Ferrous giants can
employ various spell-like abilities: at will—heat metal, levitate; 1/day—
wall of iron. Ferrous giants are immune to fire.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Iron Giant
A small two-story wooden house sits inside a picket fence where
chickens roam freely. A large barn sits on the edge of the clearing within
sight of the farmhouse. A wooden porch wraps around the front of the
home, and is painted a mix of colors, reds, blues, greens and yellows.
Dirty clothes lie in piles in the weed-filled yard.

A 10-year-old boy sits in a creaking porch swing, carving an apple with
a large dagger. The dagger has a gold hilt and the blade gleams brightly.
The boy's hair is long, and the clothes he wears look a few sizes too large
for him.

Cadmon Niddle is an orphan who was adopted by a rather unusual
parent. The boy was snatched out of the orphanage he was sent to after his
parents died, but was “found” while running away by Marsivin, a ferrous
giant who had recently lost his own son to a thundershrike.
Cadmon lives alone in the now-vacant log-cabin (Marsivin ate the
former residents a few weeks ago). The giant provides for the boy's needs
by raiding nearby farms and villages. Cadmon already considers the giant
his “dad,” simply because the giant treats him better than any adult he's
ever met. Marsivin is just as protective of his newfound son.
The ferrous giant sleeps in a pile of hay in the barn – well within
shouting distance if Cadmon needs him.

Giant, Jack-In-Irons
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16+1d6
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: Club (7d6)
Special: hurl boulders, shake earth, stun
Move: 15
Saving Throw: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/2,300

A jack-in-irons looks like a huge orc adorned in chains. It stands 20 to
25 feet tall and weighs 13,000 to 15,000 pounds. Any creature struck by
its weapon must save or be stunned for 1 turn. A jack-in-irons can stomp
its foot on the ground to cause powerful vibrations that radiate around the
giant and cause opponents to fall down. The giant can throw rocks for 7d6
points of damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Slave Caravan
The ground trembles at the approach of the jack-in-irons and its troupe.
Two hill giants roll a 10-foot-diameter iron ball. The iron ball is covered
in ancient runes and glyphs of an unknown origin. The giants use the
ball for to destroy things by battering walls and buildings with it, and by
rolling it into opponents from atop hills. The ball has one cavity that bears
a stout iron loop. The jack-in-irons can attach a chain to the loop and use
it as wrecking ball or massive flail to smash multiple opponents.
Behind the lead hill giants, two teams of tethered ogres pull two ironand-wood prisoner wagons that hold captured slaves. A platoon of
black orcs holding readied crossbows ride atop each wagon behind iron
battlements. The black orcs serve as shock troops and raiding parties.
The barbed wagons have wheels of iron with spiked treads. The wagons
are cumbersome and slow to move. The monstrous wagons contain only
the choice slaves, as the rest are eaten or slain for entertainment. The
dreadful Rhobrus Krupp, a jack-in-irons giant, commands the motley
band of slavers.
Rhobrus Krupp and his band travel down from the Hollow Spire
Mountains yearly to raid and destroy. They leave nothing but destruction
in their wake. None of the captives taken into the mountains has ever
escaped to tell of their plight.

Giant, Sand
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 17
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Two-handed sword (4d6) or 2 strikes (1d10)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Shape earth, spells, rock catching
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 19/4100

Sand giants are brutal, somewhat barbaric giants that prey on those
weaker than themselves. They have dark tan skin, brown hair, and dark
brown or dark green eyes. An adult male stands approximately 20 feet
tall. Males tend to wear their hair and beards braided. Sand giants wear
light clothes and light armor (if any). In times of battle or war, males may
don chainmail. A typical sand giant's bag contains food, 3d4 mundane
items and no more than 12d10 coins. Sand Giants speak their own harsh
rongue and the common tongue. They can live to be 500 years old.

Sand giants make their homes in warm desert lands away from human
civilization. They live in tribes consisting of 8-9 families of 2-4 members
each. On occasion, a tribe forms a raiding party that sets off to the nearest
civilized place, returning at a later time with food, treasure and captives.
For each adult in a sand giant's lair, there is a 40% chance that the lair has
1d3 captives of a random humanoid race.

Once per day, a sand giant can form a volume of sand within 40 feet
into the shape of a 20-foot long arm that ends in a clenched fist. The arm
has a reach of 20 feet, AC 0 [19] and 30 hp. It can attack once per round
as a 12 HD monster and deals 1d10 points of damage on each attack and
any creature struck must succeed on a saving throw or be stunned for
1 round. The arm remains for 17 rounds. A sand giant does not need to
concentrate to maintain the arm and can direct it to attack a new target
without sacrificing its own attack. The arm loses shape if it is reduced to
0 or less hp, the duration expires, or the sand giant dies.

Sand giant scan also cast the following spells: Transmute rock to mud
(2/day), move earth (2/day) and earthquake (1/day).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Simoom of the Sands
While traversing a blazing desert, the adventurers might come upon
a little man in white robes and a crooked turban. The man has a thin,
heavily wrinkled face reminiscent of a monkey, while creamy white
skin and wisps of silver hair escaping from his turban. He carries a blue
parasol and is well adorned in silver chains and bits of amber (worth
about 60 gp). As they approach, he hails them and, standing as straight
as his old spine will allow, pronounces that he is the herald of a great
chieftain of the desert sands and seeks ladies or gentlemen of unrivaled
puissance who would prove their mettle in the arena of his master for ten
times their weight in gold.

If the adventurers are so uncouth as to attack the old man, he will call
out for his master and a simoom will sweep over the scene, blinding the
adventurers and forcing them to pass saving throws or be knocked over,
tumbled and possibly buried in sand. When the wind dies down, the old
man will have disappeared.

If they accept, the old man will lead them about a mile away and,
reaching a large, white stone in the midst of the desert will call upon
the adventurers to surround it. Tapping his parasol on the white stone,
the sand surrounding them will begin to roll away in waves, eventually
leaving the travelers and the old man standing upon an ancient, weathered
courtyard of limestone paving stones, about 500 feet square with a round,
iron trapdoor about 12 feet in diameter in its center. The white stone
stands about six feet tall uncovered and just a few feet from the trapdoor.
A few minutes after the courtyard and trapdoor are revealed, the door is
opened by the hand of a sand giant, a massive man swathed in thick robes
with a saffron scarf wrapped about his head. He ushers the visitors through
the trapdoor, a narrow, spiral staircase being provided for little folk. This
entrance leads down about 150 feet. At the bottom are two doors, 30 feet
tall, that lead into a massive hall. Within the hall are 1d20+7 sand giants
and a third as many females and young. A tall chair at one end of the hall
bears a sand giant chieftain in robes of pure, white cotton and holding a
shepherd's crook of gold and lapis lazuli (worth 3,000 gp). He wears a
tall, pointed helmet of brass wrapped with a crimson scarf of silk. Besides
his normal abilities, the chieftain can also cast spells as a 9th level cleric.
The chieftain invites his visitors in, feeds them savories and sweet tea,
entertains them with dancers and acrobats (it's hard to believe beings so
large can be so graceful) and then calls on them to prove their prowess
against his warriors. Each warrior will be asked to fight single-handed
against a single giant. They may use weapons like clubs or staves (which
will be provided) or their fists, but no bladed weapons are permitted.
Should the warrior win, he is showered with gold coins equal to ten times
his own weight. Should he lose, he will be clasped in irons and made a
cupbearer to the chieftain and his warriors.

Giant, Sea
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 14+1d6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Trident (6d6)
Special: hurl boulders, magical abilities
Move: 15
Saving Throw: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,300

Sea giants are bluish-green amphibious giants standing 10 feet tall
and weighing about 6,000 pounds. Sea giants adorn themselves in loose
flowing robes of white, blue, or green. Many wear wreathes of coral in
their hair. Sea giants are the living embodiment of the sea's bounty and
destructive wrath. They can control water as per the spell five times per
day. They can also increase the pressure of the water in a 10-foot radius
around them for 5 rounds. Any creature in this denser water must save or
take 1d8 points of damage from the crushing water. Sea giants can move
freely in water without hindrances.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Rock the Boat
The harbor in the seaport city of Bargarsport appears more like a
battlefield than a bustling marina, with flaring tempers between sea
captains and sailors reaching war-like levels. Ships have collided; anchor
chains are entwined, and the disappearance of precious cargo has led
the sailors to blame one another. Several cargo ships are openly hostile
toward one another. The true culprits behind the tension lie below the
surface of the bay. A group of sea giants wreak havoc on the ships while
searching for a sacred giant conch shell. The powers or importance of the
shell are a mystery that only the giants know.
The sea giants force ships to collide, pull on anchor chains, search the
boat decks (eating any supplies they find) and move unattended ships. The
sailors blame one another for these incidents. The smuggler's ship, The
Miscreant Treant, is a rum smuggler who is hiding a shipment in hopes
of avoiding the city's hefty harbor tax. While hiding another plunder of
rum on a sandy island for their return, the sailors discovered the jeweled
conch shell.
The leader of the sea giants carries a glass bubble helm that magically
fills with seawater and allows him to move about on dry land indefinitely.
The sea giants have not resorted to violence yet but have already sunk
several ships by prying open hulls in search of their revered shell. If
angered, the giants yank the anchor chains to sink the ships or rock the
boats violently to send sailors overboard.

Giant, Smoke
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8+1d6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: weapon (2d6)
Special: hurl boulders, immune to fire, smoke form, smoke
cloud
Move: 15
Saving Throw: 8
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

This filthy giant resembles a 9-foot-tall humanoid with soot-colored
skin. A smoke giant's form is solid, but it can turn into a smoky form
similar to gaseous form. The giant can cause a billowing smoke cloud to
surround it at will. The giant can throw rocks for 2d6 points of damage.

Smoke on the Water
A 50-foot-tall brick smokestack rises out of the center of a wide shallow
lake. Billowing plumes of smoke drift out of the chimney and dissipate
high in the clouds overhead. A thick mixture of mist and smoke settles
back over the surface of the lake, obscuring its surface. Six large rowboats
sit tethered to posts along the shore. The lake itself is no more than five
to six feet deep, and the water is very warm but not hot enough to cause
harm. The water becomes warmer closer to the chimney, and has a thin
coat of oily ash floating on the surface. The lake bottom is a mire of
sunken soot.
A group of smoke giants guards this chimney against intruders. They
remain in smoke form hidden around the lake and use massive cinders
buried within the sooty lake bottom as boulders. The chimney possibly
leads into a great underground forge used by friendly dwarves or raging
fire giants. An iron rung ladder set into the exterior and interior of the
chimney appears to be the only entrance into the forge below. The size of
the ladder and width of the chimney should meet the size requirements
of the smiths below. (See the Dragon, Smoke entry for a variant of what
may be at the bottom of the chimney.)

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Giant, Volcano
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 14+1d6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 1 weapon (4d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Throw boulders, breath weapon, immune to fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3,200

A volcano giant is an 18-foot tall barrel-chested giant with black or
brown hair and brown, black, or dark amber eyes. Its skin is leathery
and tanned reddish-brown. The hair of a volcano giant is tough and wiry,
with the strength and texture of copper. Three times per day, a volcano
giant can exhale a cloud of sulfuric gas in a 30-foot cone. This gas causes
creatures who fail a save to succumb to fits of coughing and choking.
Volcano giants can throw rocks for 2d8 points of damage. Volcano giants
are immune to fire.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene, Casey Christofferson, and Erica
Balsley.

The Soul of Truth
A giant-size basalt throne sits on the side of the Candledusk Volcano.
Images of fire ravaging the countryside decorate its sides. Sitting in the
throne is an 18-foot-tall volcano giant. He wears a dirty toga smeared
with ash, and has a long beard flowing down to his lap. A 40-foot-long
black chain shackles the giant's ankle to one leg of the throne. Far above,
the volcano spits and hisses.
Yak Splitear sits quietly in the throne, his palms facing upward on the
arms of the chair. His eyes are closed in contemplation. His face is serene,
as if he is meditating. The giant's shadow appears nearly 40 feet away
from him, a dark blot on the mountain plateau disconnected from Yak.
Stacks of food, coins and even old weapons and shields sit around
the base of the throne. Three goats are tethered to a nearby rock. The
townsfolk of Morlayne bring these offerings to the giant each month to
gain his advice and to hear his predictions. Years ago, Yak offended a
deity walking the land. This all-powerful being stole Yak's soul but made
the giant an offer: If he would sit in this throne and answer questions
truthfully, his soul would gradually return to him. The giant has been in
the seat for 20 years, and his soul – the shadow rippling on the ground –
is getting closer with every piece of advice he offers. The advice doesn’t
have to be true or even good, just so long as Yak speaks truthfully.
Anyone nearing the shadow draws Yak's immediate glare, and the
short-tempered volcano giant attacks anyone daring to touch it.

Giant, Wood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Two-handed sword (2d8) or longbow (2d6)
Saving Throw: 9 (7 vs. charm)
Special: Change self, surprise on roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

This giant resembles a wood elf of about 10 feet tall. It has brownishgreen skin, a bald head, and bright green eyes.
Wood giants are peaceful, good-natured giants found in the forested
areas of the world. The average wood giant stands 9 feet tall, weighs 900
pounds, and resembles a large wood elf. Wood giants have brownishgreen skin, bright green eyes, large heads and prominent jaws; their elflike ears sit high on their long, oval heads. Most wood giants (particularly
males) are bald. Wood giants dress in greens or browns and prefer neutral
colors to the bright or dull colors of other races. Wood giants speak their
own language and the language of elfs, and may also speak common.
Wood giants can live to be 400 years old. Three times per day, a wood
giant can alter its form so as to appear as any humanoid creature between
3 feet and 15 feet tall.
Wood giants are on friendly terms with most benign creatures of the
forest, particularly wood elves. Though contact outside their immediate
clan is rare, they do occasionally have dealings with nearby tribes of wood
elves. Wood giant villages are large and open expanses of land with few
if any buildings or shelters. Wood giants prefer to spend their time under
the warmth of the day and the serenity of the night. They do not associate
with—and usually attack on sight—evil forest creatures. The leaders of
wood giant clans might have the abilities of 1st to 3rd level rangers.

The Trees Are Still Taller
The tall, straight trees of the woodland are lit with a ghostly, white light
at night. In the center of the forest there is a large oak tree - 150 feet tall
- hung with long, glowing crystals. The oak serves as the centerpoint of a
permanent camp of 1d4+1 wood giants and the 1d4 dire wolves they use
as hounds. The wood giants dwell in tall patchwork tents of red deer pelts
around a smoldering fire pit. They are currently entertaining a party of
1d3+1 wood elf traders who have brought gifts of tobacco and bricks of
tea to win the alliance of these great hunters.
The tree is home to a dryad as tall as the wood giants, with auburn skin,
flowing hair of pale green and bright, white eyes that have a gaze attack
that holds monster (as the spell). The dryad is the tutelary spirit of the
woodlands, and the wood giants are her devoted servants. They will be
aghast at the arrival of outsiders in this holy place, and quickly attempt to
seize them with the help of the wood elves.
Once bound, the intruders are hung by their feet from low branches
and not permitted to sleep for 3 days and nights, while being whipped
with switches cut from the surrounding underbrush. At the end of this
purification ritual, they are cut down and given a brisk massage and
medicinal soup of mushrooms and nettles. A dab of woad is applied to
their foreheads and are pronounced the sons and daughters of the dryad
and accepted into the society of the wood elves and giants. Resistance to
this ritual is met with deadly force.

Credit: The Wood Giant originally appeared in the Second Edition Monstrous
Compendium 5 (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1990) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Wizards
of the Coast.

Glass Wyrm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5-7
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (3d6)
Saving Throw: 12, 11, or 9
Special: Breathes shards of glass
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5 HD (8/800), 6 HD (9/1,100), 7 HD (10/1,400)

This semi-transparent dragon appears to be formed of crystal or glass.
Its large wings are translucent and the sound of grating glass can be heard
when it moves. It breathes razor-sharp shards of glass in a 60-foot-long
cone that is roughly 30 feet wide at the base. Any light source brought
within 30 feet of a glass dragon's reflective surface causes the light to
reflect as a burst that blinds all creatures within 30 feet for 1d6 rounds
unless a save is made. Spells that target a glass dragon have a 50% chance
of reflecting in a random direction.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Misguided Intentions
Nestled among fields of barley and clear mountain streams sits the large
town of Alemint. The town is renowned for its high-quality brew and
spirits, and many breweries operate there. Large barley farms surround
the settlement and the smell of grain and yeast fills the air. The town
is serious about the brewing profession, but Alemint likes to let its hair
down every 30 days during an alcohol-fueled celebration called the
Straubinfest. During Straubinfest , beer flows freely and the town fills
with loud music and wild dancing until the wee hours of the morning.
The rest of the week is dedicated to cleaning up after the celebration and
preparing for the next.
Recently though, things have gone sour in Alemint. The townsfolk are
weak and ill, and the normally festive Straubinfest is a pale shadow of its
former self, with the beloved smell of beer now invoking nausea for many
of the townsfolk. Townsfolk wander the streets, holding their heads and
stomachs as if they’d just woken up with a terrible hangover.
The elders blame the sickness on a glass dragon named Chalcedon that
resides farther up the mountain in an abandoned quartz mine. Ten days
before each new Straubinfest, the citizens of Alemint offer a maiden to
the dragon in hopes of lifting the curse. The dragon has nothing to do
with the sickness befalling the townsfolk; the actual curse is caused by a
microscopic mold blight that infects the barley fields and spoils the brew.
The bound maidens left outside the dragon's quartz mine lair die from
exposure to the elements and are carried off by scavengers as the innocent
glass dragon slumbers deep within the mines.
A 15-foot pillar made from a single quartz crystal sits outside the mine's
entrance. Chains and shackles are embedded into its surface. Bones and
garments litter the ground around the crystal pillar. The large mine adit
is cut into the white quartz wall, and light gleams and reflects within the
crystal mine shafts. Chalcedon lives a peaceful life and rarely leaves the
comforts of his lair. Other monstrosities (such as crystal ooze, gelatinous
cubes of enormous size and a colony of geons) live in the mines and serve
as guardians to the glass dragon and its crystalline treasures. Adventurers
may reason with the dragon, but persuading the town's folk
of the true nature of their curse is another matter.

Gloom Crawler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 10 tentacles (1d6 plus constrict), bite (2d8)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Constrict, all-around senses, vulnerable to sunlight
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

Gloom crawlers resemble giant squid with many, 5-foot-long tentacles
that end in a small, round, lidless eye with a stark blue pupil. These many
eyes let it see in all directions at once, and let it sense the location of
anything within 60 feet that is touching the ground. If a gloom crawler hits
with a tentacle, it grabs the victim and constricts for automatic damage in
the rounds thereafter until the creature is freed. Gloom crawlers take 1d4
points of damage from natural sunlight.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Monkey House
Wooden bars fill this underground 50-by-50-foot square room, the
horizontal poles rising to the ceiling 30 feet overhead. Taut ropes hang
between the bars. Shredded netting dangles throughout the chamber and
shrouds the doorways. Jungle plants grow throughout the chamber, and
leafy green vines hang down from the ceiling. Monkey feces covers the
floor, and a couple of dead chimps lie facedown in the dirt, their bodies
twisted and crushed. A circus wagon with a crude monkey painted on its
wooden side sits in the corner, one of its wagon wheels broken.
A pair of gloom crawlers took over the monkey house, and the primates
inside were no match for the creatures. One gloom crawler lives in the
broken wagon, while the other sleeps on a small dark ledge near the
ceiling. The gloom crawlers can each get around quite well using all the
odd protrusions, ledges and ropes filling the room. They often attack from
above by swinging down to snatch victims into the air with their tentacles.
On the ledge near the ceiling is the remains of a dwarf. On his body
remain a +1 warhammer (1d6) and a potion of levitation.

Gloomwing
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4), bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Confusion, implant, weakness pheromone,
summon gloomwings
Move: 3/15 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Gloomwings look like a giant moths with black wings covered in
spiraled patterns of silver. Eight legs run the length of the their bodies,
each ending in a pearly-white claw. Their mouths have two large pearlywhite mandibles. The gloomwing is native to the Plane of Shadow and is
summoned to the Material Plane by spellcasters to act as a guardian. On
occasion, a gloomwing slips through a tear in the fabric of the planes and
enters the Material Plane on its own. The ivory mandibles of a gloomwing
can be pried or broken from its carcass and sold for 100 gp each.
The coloration on the gloomwing's back and wings provide it with
protection against some predators. Any creature viewing the gloomwing
from above must succeed on a saving throw or be affected as if by a
confusion spell for 6 rounds.
After the first round of combat, a gloomwing can emit a scent in a 30foot radius that weakens living creatures in the area. An affected creature
can make a saving throw each round it remains in the area to negate the
effects. Otherwise, they suffer a -1 penalty on melee attacks and melee
damage. The pheromone ceases when the gloomwing dies. Strength
damage dealt by a gloomwing's pheromone heals at a rate of 1 point per
hour. Each round a gloomwing emits its weakness pheromone there is a
20% chance that 1d4 additional gloomwings arrive in the area and join
the battle.
Female gloomwings lay their eggs in the bodies of slain victims. In
12 days, these eggs hatch, releasing 1d6+3 tenebrous worms. The young
emerge about 2 weeks later as a tenebrous worms (see that entry), literally
devouring the host from inside. While implanted, a body cannot be
brought back to life except by the casting of a wish. If cure disease is cast
on the body, the eggs are destroyed and the body can be raised normally.

Credit: The Gloomwing originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Cube in a Bubble
In the middle of a geest (a sandy heath) surrounded by flat marshlands
and grazed upon by bison, there rises a crystalline dome of smoky glass.
The glass cannot be scratched or damaged, not even by diamonds. When
the dome is touched, there is a 1 in 6 chance it draws the toucher inside,
which it turns out is actually a sphere.
The person drawn into the sphere slides to the bottom (save or suffer
1d4 points of falling damage). The sphere has a diameter of 50 feet. A
number of adamantine cords extend from the walls of the sphere to a
silvery cube suspended in the center. The cube gives off an intermitant,
flickering glow, sending arcs of electricity across the cords and along the
sphere walls as it does. These blasts of electricity occur on a roll of 1 on
1d8 (roll each round) and inflict 1d4 points of damage to people inside
the sphere.
Separating the cube from the cords can be accomplished by depressing
a button on each side of the cube that is not connected to a cord. The
cords all release at the same moment, sending anyone who has climbed
up the cords to the bottom of the sphere (a 50-foot fall). The cube remains
floating in the center of the sphere and continues to electrify anyone
touching it.
At this point, the remainder of the sphere becomes as black as night and
people in the sphere might see flickers of movment in the blackness out
of the corner of their eye. This is the movement of the sphere's guardian,
a gloomwing. The gloomwing does its best to destroy intruders. If it fails,
a second gloomwing is called forth in 1d4+2 rounds and then a third, etc.
The cube, having been rid of the adamantine cords, has four additional
buttons on its surface. If pressed in the proper combination, they cause
the cube to spin and give off a blinding light. When the light fades, the
sphere will have disappeared (a crater is left behind) and the cube shrunk
to the size of a human fist. The cube now grants its holder immunity to
electricity and control over creatures infused with electricity, such as blue
dragons.

Gnarlwood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 4 branches (2d6)
Special: magical abilities, animate dead, rend, protection
aura
Move: 12
Saving Throw: 4
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A gnarlwood resembles a treant but instead of the kindly, gentle face of the
tree-folk its face is twisted into a grim scowl. Its deep-set eyes and jagged
mouth give it an almost skull-like grimace and its four twisted arms are
tipped in sharp woody claws. Its leaves are deep green, almost black, and have
ghostly white markings on them. Behind it, the skeletal remains of unfortunate
animals shamble through the undergrowth. A gnarlwood exudes a 20-foot radius
protection from good around it, and can animate dead within 60 feet at will.
If a gnarlwood hits a single opponent with two branches, it grabs the creature
and does an additional 1d6 points of damage as it rends the victim's flesh.

Save the Kitty
An abandoned and dilapidated cemetery sits atop a small knoll with a dead and
twisted tree at its peak. The pleading bellows of a golden-furred cat emanates
for high up in the tree. Ten undead zombies claw at the trunk in vain attempts
to reach the stranded feline. Many of the graves have hollow depressions where
the dead dug their way out of the earth. Many more skeletons and zombies
remain buried in their rotting coffins. Some of the dead were buried with
semi-valuable possessions, most of which remain in the grave or lie fallen on
the ground. This gnarlwood purposely uses cats (in this case a golden cat) to
attract would-be do-gooders. It remains inanimate until victims are close
enough. The remains of dozens of cats, opossums and raccoons lie scattered
around its trunk.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Gohl (Hydra Cloud)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attacks: 6 tentacles (1d6+3) and 3 acidic bites (1d8+3)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Acid, constrict, +1 magic weapons to hit
Move: 15 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A gohl is a 10-foot-wide, 10-foot-high, blob of mottled black and gray
flesh, slimy and rubbery to the touch. From its central form sprout six
long tentacles of brownish flesh and three snake-like heads, each head
perched atop a long, thin neck. Each head is gold with red eyes and has
a wide mouth lined with double rows of needle-sharp teeth. Many small
tendrils appear from the gohl's central form at random intervals only to
disappear back into its massive trunk. A gohl tries to grab victim in its
tentacles. If an opponent is struck by two or more tentacles in the same
round, he is constricted and takes 1d6+3 damage each round thereafter.
Creatures held by a tentacle are pulled toward the creature's mouth. The
toxic bite of a gohl deals 1d8 points of acid damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Serpent Demon
Vine-covered stone steps head down into darkness from the steppyramid's steep outer slope. The corridor is narrow, and colorful snakes
and twisting jungle plants twine along the block walls. Every 10 feet, a
leering face with a forked tongue sticking between fanged teeth is carved
into the stone. Flickering torches are mounted in soot-covered sconces
at head height. The air is stale and oppressive and smells of dried meat.
The corridor opens onto a 30-foot-tall chamber in the pyramid's heart.
A 25-foot-tall towering statue of a snake-faced demon with a human body
stands in the center of the room, his arms stretched out before him. The
statue's fingers are splayed wide, and thick tendrils of vines hang down.

Two struggling humans are held in the vines like puppets. The statue's
demonic face peers down at the captives, and its forked tongue juts from
its fanged maw. The statue's eyes are cinders that burn a hellish red.

Beneath the statue is a 15-foot-wide pit filled with the undulating bodies
of thousands of serpents. The snakes – of all sizes – twist and squirm in
a ball of serpentine flesh. Around the pit stand seven robed figures and 5
women cavorting in a rhythmic dance around the snakes. The struggling
humans are held just on the edge of the pit. The dancers wind in and
around the helpless victims. The women are naked, but their deformities
are obvious: Each has a serpent growing at the end of her arms where her
hands should be.

The women are inphidian dancer/charmers lost in the throes of ecstasy
to their god and creator. The robed figures are four common inphidians,
two cobra-back protectors and the “high priest,” an inphidian night adder.
The inphidians are intent on sacrificing the humans – two wandering
fighters named Toral and Bethane – to the living embodiment of their
god: a gohl in the serpent pit. The inphidians are from the serpent city of
Uroborus in the Seething Jungle sent to protect the gohl.

The gohl rises out of the pit if the inphidians are attacked.
Snakes drop off its slimy flesh as it flies toward PCs and
lashes out with its tentacles. The inphidians join the fight,
but flee if the gohl is slain.

Cat, Golden
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d2)
Special: lucky/unlucky
Move: 10
Saving Throw: 17
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

A golden cat is a normal cat with rich golden fur and green eyes. When
a golden cat selects an “owner,” it grants that creature good fortune. Three
times per day, so long as the golden cat is within 40 feet, the owner can
reroll one die roll and take the most favorable result. Only one die can be
rerolled each round. Each time the golden cat activates this ability and
the owner rerolls a die, all other creatures (including the owner's allies)
within 40 feet of the golden cat must reroll one die roll and take the least
favorable result each time.

The Cat in the Bag
A large bag moves down the passage. A single cat's leg grasps
the floor as it reaches out of the nearly closed sack. The leg strains
as it pulls the bag blindly down the passage. The bag is a bag of
devouring that has tightened around a golden cat. The golden cat
managed to free one leg to prevent the bag from swallowing it whole.

The bag has magical strength and does not give up its newest victim
easily. Cutting the bag frees the cat but also opens a brief portal to another
dimension and releases a trapped demonic marsh jelly.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Golem, Blood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6 (25 hp)
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 strikes (1d8 plus blood consumption)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Blood consumption, cell division, +1 or better
weapon to hit, regenerate (2 hp/rd), immune to mindaffecting abilities, resistance to fire (50%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

This creature looks like a hideous, bloated slug, blood red in color. Two
long spindly arms protrude from its upper body. It has no other discernible
features. Contrary to their name, blood golems are not constructs, but
rather slug-shaped clots of living blood animated by a dark and ancient
ritual. A typical blood golem is 10 feet long and weighs 700 pounds.
Each time a blood golem hits a living opponent with an attack, it gains
a number of hp equal to the damage dealt. These bonus hp
are added to the blood golem's total. When a blood golem absorbs enough
blood to raise its hp to the maximum for its HD, it splits into two
identical blood golems, each with half the original's hp. For
example, a 6 HD blood golem that reaches 48 hp splits into two 6
HD blood golems with 24 hp each.
If a blood golem successfully hits an opponent with both of its slam attacks
in a single round, that opponent suffers catastrophic blood expulsion, taking
2d4 points of constitution damage (saving throw for half). A blood golem
gains 3 hp per point of constitution damage it deals.
A blood golem is slowed (as the spell) for 1d4 rounds by any coldbased attacks or effects. A purify food and water spell deals 1d6 points of
damage per caster level to a blood golem. A blood golem can attempt a
saving throw to reduce the damage by half.

Blood Tribute
A procession of blue robed men and women, the monks and nuns of
a large abbey dedicated to a deity of death is making its way through
a crowded town on their way to pay a hated tribute to the town's Lord
Mayor. Four of the monks are bearing a cassone of iron covered in
shallow reliefs of dancing skeletons. The cassone is born on two thick
poles of oak. At the head of the procession is the abbot, a gangly man
with a scarred face and voluminous robe of blue velvet lined with sable.
Inside the cassone there is a blood golem, animated from the blood of
numerous victims culled from the town and sacrificed on a hidden altar.
The monks plan to carry the cassone into the city council's chambers and
present it to the Lord Mayor in a bid to seize power.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Golem, Flagstone
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9 (50 hp)
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 fists (2d8)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Hit only by magic weapons, immune to most spells
Move: 8
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

A flagstone golem is composed of large flat stones and bricks jointed
and fitted together so as to allow the creature to fold itself flat. A flagstone
golem stands 10 feet tall and weighs 1,200 pounds. Spells that affect
rock are the only ones that affect flagstone golems. Any energy-based
(acid, fire, cold, electricity) attack that directly effects a flagstone golem
is absorbed into its body dealing no damage. A flagstone golem can use
the absorbed energy to repair itself, healing 1 hit point for every 3 points
of damage the attack would have otherwise dealt. Or it can release the
energy in a 30-foot cone that deals 3d8 points of damage to all within the
area. An opponent can save to reduce the damage by half.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Mom
Brilliant and multicolored light fills this large domed room. A massive
stain glass dome serves as the ceiling. Radiant lights shine through the
dome, projecting vibrant images onto the floor. The lights behind the dome
rotate, giving the projected image a sense of animation. Highly polished
mirrors cover the curved walls and create a sense of endless space and light.

The images on the dome tell the life story of a wizard in 12 panels as she rose
to power. Her deeds include
slaying dragons, creating
golems, protecting towns from
encroaching armies of gnolls,
building a floating tower, and
finally a funeral panel where
mortals and angels mourn her
death. In each of the panels,
the mage carries a ruby tipped
staff. The light that passes
through the rubies casts red ray
onto the floor. Each ray deals
1d6 points of fire damage to
anything that touches or passes
through it. This beam heals the
flagstone golem.
The stone and mosaic glass
floor displays a family tree of
sorts, with 10-foot-tall mosaic
representations of the magicuser's
female
ancestors
forming a circle on the floor.
A flagstone golem protects the
room. The animated creature
lies in the spot on the floor where the magic-user's mother is represented.

Golem, Furnace
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18 (75 hp)
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 slams (4d8 + fire)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, fire heals, cold slows, +2 weapons
to hit, immune to most spells
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4,400

Furnace golems are 20-foot-tall suits of black iron armor with a large
grate opening in their abdomen covering roaring flames. The fires are
magical and cannot be extinguished. Once every 1d4 rounds, the golem
belches forth a line of fire in a 50-foot line that does 10d6 points of
damage (save for half). If a furnace golem hits a single opponent with 2
slams, it grabs the opponent (save avoids) and shoves the victim into its
furnace interior (2d6 damage per round while trapped). Cold-based spells
slow the golem (as per the slow spell), while fire spells restore hp.
No other type of spell affects a furnace golem.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Can’t Stand the Heat
A pitiful halfling scavenges in the deep forest, filling a rusty wheelbarrow
with branches and kindling. His fingers are blackened and covered by
thick burns and scars. He wears soot-covered rags. His eyes are red and
his hair is burnt to his scalp. His eyebrows are gone. Droog is a miserable
being forced to care for the Unseen Tower of Archipor by a missing
magic-user.
The tower is built of tightly packed gray stone rising four stories into the
sky. The top is crenellated and topped by a metal fence. A single red oak
door stands in the side of the tower.
A furnace golem sits like a pot-bellied stove in the middle of the
tower's open first-floor room, connected to a network of pipes that snake
throughout the tower. Hot water flows through the metal pipes, and steam
hisses out of loose fittings. The golem doesn’t bother anyone who enters
the tower – unless they try to leave the entryway. A circular staircase rises
through the ceiling to the second floor. Droog sleeps in a small bed under
the staircase. Even he is not allowed above this floor. The golem belches
fire and steam.
Droog thanks PCs profusely if they kill the golem and set him free.

Golem, Gelatinous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10 (65 hp)
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: 2 fists (2d6 + paralysis)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Hit only by magic weapons, immune to most spells
Move: 8
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

A gelatinous golem is a humanoid-shaped, semi-transparent amoeba
that stands 8 feet tall and weighs 600 pounds. It has rudimentary
intelligence. A gelatinous golem secretes an anesthetizing slime that
paralyzes opponents for 2d4 rounds who fail a save. If a gelatinous golem
hits an opponent with both fists, it can decide to engulf the opponent
automatically on the next round. An engulfed opponent takes 1d6 points
of damage each round from the the gelatinous golem's acid each round
it remains trapped. Attacks on a gelatinous golem deal half their damage
to anyone engulfed by the creature. Cold slows a gelatinous golem. It is
immune to all other spells.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Belly of the Beast
An idol of indescribable repugnance adorns this putrid shrine. The
floors, walls and ceiling are coated in a thin layer of fatty gelatin and
hardened stalactites of slime drip harmless sludge to the floor. A 15-footdiameter bowl-shaped depression in the floor serves as an unholy altar of
sorts. Fetid slime fills the pool and a dozen skeletal hands made of iron
reach out from its depths.
The inanimate hands are merely decorative although the pool contains
a dreaded green slime. Adjacent to the pool sits an idol of a demonic
slime lord. The 15-foot-tall patchwork idol appears fashioned from the
sewn skins of several humanoids and animals. Crudely made, the thing
resembles a giant slug with the head and arms of an ogre. The distended
belly of the decaying sculpture is like an overfilled wineskin. Beads of
ooze and puss flow out of the seams and onto the floor. The stomach
contents are actually a gelatinous golem that is the protector of the shrine.
It bursts out of the distended stomach in a spray of gore and animal parts.
This recently abandoned shrine to the demon lord of ooze remains
empty. The cultists took all valuables with them as they fled, but left the
golem protector.

Golem, Ice
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7 (30 hp)
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  2 slams (2d6 plus 1d6 cold)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Breath weapon, cold, immunity to cold, immunity
to magic, double damage from fire
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

The ice golem is a humanoid formed of roughly chiseled ice, standing
10 feet tall and weighing around 800 pounds. Ice golems at rest appear
to be normal ice sculptures and are often mistaken as such. An ice golem
usually opens combat with its breath weapon, a blast of cold air in the
shape of a cone 20-feet long with a 10-foot wide base. The breath weapon
inflicts 3d6 points of cold damage (save for half damage) and can be used
3 times per day. An ice golem's body generates intense cold, dealing 1d6
points of damage with its touch.
An ice golem is immune to all spells except as follows: Lightning-based
effects slow an ice golem (as the spell) for 2d6 rounds. Cold-based effects
heal all of its lost hp.
An ice golem's body must be constructed from a single block of ice
weighing at least 1,000 pounds. The ice is treated with magical powders
and unguents worth at least 500 gp.

Pantry of Souls
You come across an iron door in a corridor. The door cannot be pulled
open and in fact can only be pushed open from the top, as its hinges are
on the bottom of the door and parallel to the floor. The door forms a ramp
into a room 20 feet wide, 30 feet long and with a 12-ft high ceiling. The
room is quite frigid, owing to the presence of the room's guardian, an ice
golem.
The walls of the room are lined with small niches, each holding a
single bottle. The bottles contain all manner of liquids - water, poison,
holy water, wine, bitters, spirits, etc. In addition, each bottle is inhabited
by a disembodied soul with a connection to the liquid. If consumed, the
soul possesses the drinker unless the drinker passes a saving throw. The
bottles are sealed in silver and are worth about 20 gp each. A person who
examines a bottle closely might see a ghostly image staring back at them.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Golem, Iron Maiden
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12 (50 hp)
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 slams (2d10)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Animate host, +2 magic weapons
to hit, slowed by lightning, healed by fire,
immune to most spells
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2,600

An iron maiden golem is a hollow torture device. The golem appears
as a tall, well-muscled male or female warrior. An iron maiden golem has
articulated arms and legs. If an iron maiden golem hits a victim with two
slams, it must save or become trapped inside the golem. Trapped creatures
take 20 points of damage each round from the dagger-like blades inside
the lid. A creature slain inside the golem transforms into a zombie. Only
+2 or better magic weapons can harm an iron maiden golem, and it is
slowed by lightning spells. Fire-based spells heal the golem. No other
type of spell affects an iron maiden golem.

Ungal's Angel
This 30-foot-by-30-foot torture chamber has thick chains
hanging from the ceiling. Man-size iron cages swing at the ends
of the chain. Pokers, serrated blades, whips and manacles
hang from bones driven into the wall. Five wooden tables
are scarred with slashes. Brass urns sit around the floor,
each filled with congealed blood.
In the center of the east wall is a 10-foot-tall metal
angel with wings spreading above it. The creature's
face is serene, but its blank iron eyes seem to follow
creatures in the room. The angel's arms are folded
peacefully across its broad chest.
Ungal, the castle's ogre torturer, wears a blood-stained
leather apron. Hanging from his belt are mallets, iron
spikes and small saws. Ungal talks to the metal cages,
blades and torture tables as if they were close friends. But Ungal saves
his love for his pride and joy: an angel-shaped iron maiden golem named
“Charlotte.” Ungal rescued the golem from the smelting pit and relocated
the creature to his lair.
The iron maiden golem reaches out and pulls PCs into a tight embrace
as the razor-sharp wingtips fold inward and slam shut with a metallic
clang over the entrapped creature. The golem releases the victim only
when its soul is drained. Ungal can command the golem to release victims
sooner, but he enjoys seeing others suffer too much to even think of doing
so.
Ungal, Ogre Torturer: HD 7+1; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon
(1d10+1); Move 9; Save 9; CL/XP 7/600; Special: None.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Golem, Magnesium
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 slams (2d6+1)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Sickness, +1 weapons to hit, immune to most spells
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A magnesium golem is a silvery-white humanoid formed of magnesium
standing 6-7 feet tall and weighing 600 pounds. The magnesium golem's
features are smooth and perfect, though it has no discernable ears, nose,
or mouth. Its eyes are indentations in its face. A 10-foot aura of sickness
radiates around the magnesium golem that sickens any creature it hits or
that gets near it (save avoids). This sickness lasts for 1d4 turns. Waterbased spells slow a magnesium golem (as per the slow spell), while firebased spells heal the golem. They are immune to all other spells, and +1
weapons are required to hit them.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Beneath the Surface
The air in the 10-foot-high tunnel is thick and oppressive and smells
heavily of brine. Water seeps through the roof to splash against the
paving-stone floor. Glowing lichens cover the walls, casting a wan light
throughout the tunnel. An arching doorway opens into a much larger
room.

The 80-foot-diameter circular room is topped by a massive glass ceiling
keeping the ocean at bay. Glowing deepwater fish shoot past the window
in bright arcs, their luminescence lighting the chamber with a pale blue
hue. Heavy shadows fill the room. A thin layer of frost covers the floor
from the bone-numbing chill radiating through the glass ceiling.
The room is decorated with dried fish, dolphins and squid attached to a
pulley system that winds them throughout the room. Each creature flops,
moves and twists along its track as if alive. A palanquin bed covered in
silk sheets and piled with pillows sits in the center of the room, supported
by two giant figures, each with their flesh sewn and stitched into place.
Around the bed, propped up by metal posts, are the bodies of seven
mermaids posed like revelers at a party. The room was the underwater
home of the vampire Dicostia Green, who was slain as she sought out a
giant clam to complete the décor.

The room is unoccupied, but not undefended. One of the giants holding
the bed is covered in stitches and staples that hold its flesh together. In all
ways, it resembles a flesh golem. It wears a dirty tunic fastened with two
golden clam shells over its shoulders.

The creature is actually a magnesium golem with a hill giant's flesh
sewn about its true form. The creature attacks, not caring if its “flesh”
body is torn or burned away during the fight.

Hidden in a panel in the bed are potions of levitation, undead control
and human control, plus a diamond ring (worth 1,000 gp) and a bag of
gold coins (500 gp).

Golem, Mummy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9 (55 hp)
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 fists (1d8)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Hit only by +1 magic weapons, immune to most
spells, constriction
Move: 10
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A mummy golem stands 6 feet tall and weighs 300 pounds. Its body is
composed of tightly knotted and rolled bandages held together by magic
(and more bandages). A mummy golem can wrap bandages from its body
around a grappled foe's throat. The bandages can come from anywhere
on its body, not just its arm or hand, so the mummy golem can continue
using its fist. A strangled creature takes 1d6 points of damage each round.
A mummy golem can strangle a maximum of 4 opponents. Fire and firebased spells affect mummy golems normally. They are immune to all
other spells.

Tomb of the Bull King
A sealed iron door blocks entry into this chamber. The sculpted
metal head of a bull adorns the door, with a ring piercing its nose
serving as a door knocker. The door opens if the ring is used to
knock; otherwise, the door remains magically locked.
Hieroglyphs of bull-headed giants decorate the walls of the
musty tomb behind the door. Three upright stone sarcophagi line
the walls, two of which contain minotaur zombies that appear as
minotaur mummies. The third sarcophagus contains a mummy
golem created in the image of a mummified minotaur. In the
center of the chamber's floor sits the crypt lid to a buried vault.
A small golden bull figurine adorns the lid (500 gp). The crypt
contains the dead king of a small clan of minotaurs that banded
together to wreak havoc on the lands. The king wears a golden
bull funeral mask (750 gp) and other finery fit for a king.
Minotaur Zombie (2): HD 7; AC 8 [11]; Atk 1 strike
(2d6); Move 6; CL/XP 5/400; Save 11; Special:
Immune to sleep and charm spells.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Golem, Ooze
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 slams (2d8 + 1d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Acid, death throes, immune to blunt weapons,
immune to most spells, regenerate 2 hp/round
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

Ooze golems are 10-foot-tall amorphous creatures of swirling colors
that can alter their shape to appear roughly humanoid. Their natural form
resembles a column or pillar with two large pseudopods extending from
its central trunk that function as arms. In humanoid form, an ooze golem's
lower torso ends in two powerful legs, and the creature can flatten its body
to squeeze through cracks up to 2 inches in size. An ooze golem secretes a
deadly acid that deals an extra 1d6 points of damage with each hit. Spells
don’t affect ooze golems. When killed, an ooze golem explodes in a burst
of acid that does 2d6 points of damage to all within 10 feet (save for half).

Ol’ Black Water
A burbling fountain sits flush against the wall, a semicircle of stones
jutting 10 feet out into the room. A giant stone goldfish sits on the edge of
the fountain, black oily sludge spurting from its open mouth into a stone
catch basin. Another giant face carved into the wall vomits an incredible
amount of the same dark ichor. The basin bubbles and boils with the
churning fluid, the surface swirling with reds, greens, browns and grays.
Attached to the wall above the fountain is a golden replica of a long
sword. The weapon is marked with a detailed scene of a god climbing
down from the heavens to slay a massive dragon.
The gelatin-like water is an ooze golem that flows on its own through
the fountain. It is harmless unless someone disturbs the sword.
The blade is useless as a weapon, but can be sold for 200 gp as a
decorative item.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Golem, Rope
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 slams (2d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Strangulation, vulnerable to fire, immune to magic
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A rope golem is a tangled mess of knotted and bundled ropes in roughly
humanoid form. The typical rope golem stands 7 feet tall but weighs only
about 100 pounds. Its long, gangly arms end in noose-like hands. Until
it is activated, a rope golem appears to be nothing more than a pile of
normal ropes. If a rope golem hits the same opponent with 2 slams, it
twists the foe into its ropy clutches to strangle him for 1d8 damage for
each round thereafter. A rope golem takes one and a half damage from
all fire-based spells. Rope trick deals 1d6 points of damage. They are
immune to all other spells.

Scuttle and Run
A galley under full sail appears on the horizon, its prow leaping from
the water as the ship plows through the waves. Skeletons line the black
freighter's rails and stand on the ship's masts. Each waves a short sword
as the ship closes.

The Fortune Seeker and its skeletal crew are the scourge of the eastern
seaboard. The galley rides low in the water, but seems to fly across the
waves. The skeletons never take prisoners and sink vessels without
plundering treasure.

Riding on the ship are 20 skeletons, but the ship is without a leader since
a sea serpent plucked the captain off the deck. The ship gets through the
waters via a massive rope golem that is the ship's rigging. The golem
can sail the ship by itself, raising and lowering the sails at will. A rope
wrapped around the helm lets the golem steer the ship.

When the Fortune Seeker slams into a ship, the rope golem reaches out
and begins strangling victims on the opposite deck. The skeletons jump
across to attack with their short swords. The rope golem also can grasp a
ship to lash the vessel to the Fortune Seeker's side.

The forgotten treasures remaining on the ship include 2,000 gp in coins
of different nations, a room full of diamonds (all worthless glass fakes),
10 bolts of expensive cloth (500 gp total), and a hidden compartment in
the captain's empty quarters containing various spell components and a
ring of shooting stars.

SKELETONS (10): HD 1; AC 8 [11]; Atk Short sword (1d6);
Move 12; Save 17; Alignment Neutrality; CL/XP 1/15;
Special: None

ROPE GOLEM (1): HD 12; AC 7 [12]; Atk 2 slams (2d6); Move
6; Save 3; Alignment Neutrality; CL/XP 13/2,300; Special:
Strangulation, vulnerable to fire, immune to magic

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Golem, Stone Guardian
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4 (20 hp)
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  2 slams (2d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Resistance to cold, electricity and fire (50%), ring
link, see invisibility
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Stone guardians are sometimes referred to as lesser stone golems. It
resembles a stocky humanoid formed of mud and stone. Stone guardians
are often used as guardians by their creators. When the stone guardian is
first constructed, the creator crafts a magical ring that offers himself (or
anyone to whom he gives the ring) protection from that stone guardian. A
stone guardian can see invisible creatures.
A stone guardian's body is constructed from mud mixed with rare herbs
and powders worth at least 500 gp. A large chunk of stone inserted into
the chest cavity functions as its “heart.” The magical ring that links a
stone guardian is constructed at the same time and costs 300 gp to create.

Credit: The Stone Guardian originally appeared in the First Edition module L1
Secret of Bone Hill (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Lenard
Lakofka.

You Sink It or You Die
This large chamber is designed as a ball court for a hobgoblin game
very similar to tlachtli, the Inca ball game. The room is 50 feet wide and
100 feet long, with a ceiling 30 feet high. The room is clad in gray stone
tiles about 1 foot square. Squat, grimacing demons flank the “baskets” in
the two short walls.
The room is a sacred place for the hobgoblins. Those who enter the
room must propitiate the hobgoblin god of physical education by picking
up the rubber balls in the center of the room and throwing them into the
baskets. This requires a ranged attack against an AC of 5 [14].
Each time a basket is missed, one of the stone demons leave the wall
to throttle the person who missed. The “demons” are stone guardians.
Successfully throwing the balls into the holes causes a large area in the
center of the room to sink into the floor, revealing four hidden doors that
go deeper into the dungeon.

Golem, Tallow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10 (40 hp)
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  2 slams (1d8)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Chemisorb, only harmed by sharp weapons,
immunity to cold, double damage from fire
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

The tallow golem is a humanoid construct composed entirely of
wax. It bears no facial features unless the creator chooses to render a
lifelike “wax dummy,” in which case the golem can appear quite real
indeed. Wizards who specialize in the creation of tallow golems refer
to themselves as “chandlers.” Unlike other golem-sculptors, chandlers
consider their work a form of art. The golem wears whatever clothing (if
any) that its creator desires, usually rags or trousers. It has no possessions
and no weapons. The golem cannot speak or utter any sound. It moves
slowly, but relentlessly.
A creature hit by both of a tallow golem's slam attacks in a single
round must pass a saving throw or be pinned. A tallow golem can break
down and absorb chemicals from a pinned victim, dealing 1d12 points of
damage each round the pin is maintained. Additionally, this causes skin
discoloration. The victim must make a successful saving throw or lose 1
point of charisma permanently.
The tallow golem is formed from a large block of candle wax mixed
with special powders worth at least 500 gp.

As the Tallow Burns
In a deep gorge divided by a rusty river there is a divided town. The
town is joined by a long, wooden bridge, but the bridge is now off limits,
protected by a gang of four tallow golems. The town is in an uproar,
divided by a religious conflict precipitated by a young girl who claims
to have heard the voice of a goddess when she stood in the middle of the
bridge under a full moon.
The priests of the village have rejected this, and about half of the
population support them. The lord mayor of the town supports the girl
(he wishes to break the monopoly the priests hold on minting coins),
again, with the support of about half the population. There have been a
few skirmishes in the village, and the priests and their faction are now
occupying and looting the north side of the river and the lord mayor and
his faction are on the south side of the river. Anyone attempting to cross
the bridge will be accosted by the tallow golems and thrown into the river,
which is home to aggressive and hideous river dolphins.
The girl, as it happens, is lying. She came up with the story to explain
why she crept out of her house in the middle of the night. Her lover is now
trapped on the other side of the river, his family supporting the priests.

Copyright Notice: Authors Lance Hawvermale and Scott Greene.

Golem, Witch-Doll
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10 (65 hp)
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 fists (2d8)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Hit only by +1 magic weapons, immune to most
spells, linked damage
Move: 10
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A witch-doll golem appears to be crafted from stuffed human skin
dressed in a patchwork of ill-fitting clothes. Large needles and pins
pierce the creature's body where a humanoid's vital organs would be. A
witch-doll golem stands twice the height of a human and weighs about
1,000 pounds. A witch-doll golem can be commanded to target a specific
foe. Against that foe, the witch-doll golem deals an extra 1d8 points of
damage with each fist. Once the golem hits its intended target, half of any
further damage the witch-doll golem takes is transferred to the victim
so long as they are within 60 feet of each other. Only the linked target
can attack a witch-doll golem and not take “linked damage.” Witch-doll
golems take full damage from fire and do not pass this damage to their
linked target. They are immune to all other spells.

Blood Donor
A massive fluid-filled cylinder dominates this ruined laboratory.
A crudely assembled humanoid made from the parts of many
creatures floats in the translucent greenish liquid. The burnt
corpses of orcs lie clustered together where they died by
some sort of fiery blast. The decaying body of a man wearing
a leather apron lies sprawled out on the floor. A battle axe is
still embedded in the man's head. Broken glass, burnt paper
and wrecked equipment litter the floor and workbenches.
Only the cylinder and an attached complex mechanism made of
gold remain unscathed. The device has many tubes, hoses and a dial lined
with small needles.
The witch-doll golem in the fluid only needs a small sample of blood to
become active. Handling the machinery in any fashion has a 50% chance
of a needle sticking the victim and siphoning a drop of blood. Once
active, the witch-doll golem stops at nothing to slay the blood donor.
The fragments of paper hint at a lab journal and research on golems. One
sheet displays a diagram of the gold mechanism with the words “golem
completion: blood” written on it. The mechanism has a delicate pinwheel
dial lined with needles used to extract blood from flesh or a test tube.
Regardless, the witch-doll golem animates and attacks if the glass is
broken but only has quarry to chase if blood is siphoned into the gold
apparatus.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Golem, Wood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9 (40 hp)
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 slams (2d6)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Alarm, immunity to cold and electricity, double
damage from fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

Arcane spellcasters used several ancient texts to arrive at a process
to create inexpensive yet still quite powerful golems. They had master
craftsmen create wood statues with articulating limbs and then performed
the proper spells to animate and control them. The statues vary in shape
and form and usually have weapons of some sort held in each hand. The
wood golems were designed to act both as an alarm and a protection
against intruders. Wood golems let out a piercing howl that lasts for 6
rounds when anyone other than its creator enters the area it is guarding
or comes within 50 feet of the golem. This howl can be heard to a range
of 100 feet. The pieces of a wood golem are assembled from blocks of
fine wood and sprinkled with rare powders and crushed herbs worth at
least 300 gp.

Credit: Wood Golems originally appeared in the Necromancer Games adventure
Hall of the Rainbow Mage.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Patrick Lawinger.

Lich Puppets
At the edge of a great glacier there is a sturdy little cavern. A plume of
smoke rolling from the chimney invites chilled travelers to knock on the
door, which is answered by a stout man with cloudy spectacles wearing a
woolen tunic, leather boots and a leather apron. The man is actually a lich,
his soul hidden in a pulsing bloodstone hidden under the fire. An illusion
gives him the appearance of a kindly woodcarver.
The interior of the cabin is copiously covered in carvings of faces
and animals (they take on a sinister cast when one views them from the
corner of their eye), with dozens of shelves covered in dozens of wooden
puppets. Four of the puppets - a mountain goat, dairymaid, knight with
a long mustache and old hag, are actually small wood golems (stats are
the same).
The lich uses his golems to strangle people in the night, revealing
himself and his powers only if he must. Those killed have their souls
drained into glass marbles, which are then used as they eyes of puppets
animated as wood golems.

Gorbel
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Explosion, cannot be surprised, only harmed by
sharp weapons
Move: 3/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

This bizarre creature is a small orb with reddish skin. Atop its round
body are six eyestalks, each ending in a sapphire-colored eye. Dangling
beneath its body are two stubby legs that end in claws. A gorbel is
approximately 3 feet in diameter. Its reddish skin is a thin, tough and
rubbery membrane. The spherical body of a gorbel is highly elastic and
filled to near bursting with a lighter-than air flammable gas that smells
of rotten eggs (sulfur). A gorbel eats, breathes, and excretes through an
aperture best described as a mouth. This mouth is lined with a ring of
sharp teeth that face inward to help it force food into its gullet.
A gorbel's body is naturally buoyant. This buoyancy allows it to fly at a
speed of 60 feet and also grants it a permanent feather fall effect.
When a gorbel is hit with a weapon, spell, or effect that deals piercing
or slashing damage it must succeed on a saving throw or explode, dealing
1d4 points of damage to all creatures within 5 feet. This instantly kills
the gorbel.

Credit: The Gorbel originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/ Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Andrew
Key.

Bouncing Ball in the Corner Pocket
A wide river that flows through a jungle is embanked with massive
stone blocks. The river is spanned by an arched bridge that is entered
by an ivory spirit gate set with a blue crystal. The first person through
the spirit gate is struck by a beam of blue light partially on the ethereal
plane. The light cannot be blocked by any substance due to its origin. In
the middle of the bridge span there is a round tile of blue jade depicting
a leering eyeball. The tile is about 3 feet in diameter and stuck fast to the
ground. Attempts to pry it out with metal implements result in powerful
shocks (2d6 points of electricity damage, saving throw for half damage).
If a person struck by the blue light steps on the tile they will fall through
it into a pocket dimension.
This pocket dimension is a single chamber, cubical and measuring
30 feet wide, tall and long (and thus the person who enters it falls 30
feet to the floor). The walls are composed of blue jade and are perfectly
smooth. A scepter lies in the middle of the chamber, topped by a faceted
crystal. Should one breath on the crystal it throws off a reddish light as of
from a mirror ball. As the reddish spots trace their way across the walls,
2d6 gorbels emerge from the walls to attack the holder of the scepter,
bouncing off the walls as they do so. The walls will begin to shrink, losing
about 3 feet per round as the combat continues. If the crystal is broken on
the floor, the cube disappears and the person drops 30 feet to land in the
middle of the bridge span, still holding the remnants of the scepter (treat
as a +2 mace). Otherwise, the cube will shrink to the point that it folds in
one itself, leaving the holder of the scepter alone in the negative material
universe and on a vast, steaming plain of red trees under a blue sun. This
plain is rife with gorbels that serve a massive beholder, the ruler of this
strange dimension.
Others may enter this dimension by the same means as the first person,
though they will have to re-enter the spirit gate to do so. Presumably, the
palace contains all manner of weird treasures and a means of returning to
the Material Plane.

Gorgimera
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 bites (1d10), butt (1d8), 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Breath weapon
Move: 15/18 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

This hideous creature has leathery dragon wings and three heads; a lion,
a dragon, and a gorgon. Its hindquarters are that of a gorgon and its
forequarters are that of a great lion.

A gorgimera is a chimerical creature akin to the standard chimera. A gorgimera
has the heads of a lion, dragon, and gorgon. A gorgimera's dragon head can be
that of any of the chaotic dragons (see below). It has the hindquarters of
a gorgon and the forequarters of lion. It is a highly territorial predator
whose hunting range often covers several square miles around its lair. The
creature makes its home inside caves high atop mountains or deep inside
caverns. A typical lair contains a mated pair and one or two young.

A gorgimera has two breath weapons, each of which can be used independently of
the other (thus it can breathe twice in a given round as a standard action).
A gorgimera's dragon head breath weapon depends on the color of its dragon
head, as summarized on the table below. Regardless of its type, a gorgimera's
breath weapon is usable once every 1d4 rounds, deals 3d8 points of damage and
allows a saving throw for half damage.  To determine a gorgimera's head color
and breath weapon randomly, roll 1d10 and consult the table below.

===== ========== ===============================================================
d10   Head Color Breath Weapon
===== ========== ===============================================================
1–2   Black      40-foot line of acid
3–4   Blue       40-foot line of lightning
5–6   Green      20-foot cone of corrosive gas
7–8   Red        20-foot cone of fire
9–10  White      20-foot cone of cold
===== ========== ===============================================================

A gorgimera's gorgon head breath weapon is usable once every 1d4
rounds (no more than twice per day), turns a creature to stone permanently,
and allows a saving throw to avoid. The breath weapon is a cone 30 feet
long and 20 feet wide at the base.

They Picked the Wrong Beast to Poke
Crossing the snowcapped mountains you might (1 in 10 chance) come
across a grievously wounded man crawling along the ground dragging
a shattered leg. The man was part of an army that was set upon by a
gorgimera with the heads of a lion, gorgon and white dragon. The
gorgimera was defending the cavern in which reside its mate and three
young. The icy scarp beneath the cave is now littered with the bodies of
soldiers in banded armor and steel helms, as well as a splintered chariot.
The horses escaped the slaughter and now graze in a meadow about a mile
away. Slumped over the side of the chariot is the body of Lord Elphston.

Elphston wears a brilliant red cape over a gilded cuirasse (treat as
chainmail, worth 250 gp) and has a +1 long sword clutched in his cold, dead
hand. A scroll case on his hip shows the location of a fabulous treasure in
a cliffside temple. Taking possession of Elphston's longsword means certain
doom for those not of the Elphston family, in the form of a curse that imposes
a cumulative -1 penalty each week to all saving throws made by the person.
When one taps the hilt of the longsword against a structure, all doors and
windows in the structure fly open violently.

Credit: The Gorgimera originally appeared in the First Edition module S4 Lost
Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice:
Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.


True Gorgon, Medusa
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2x Shortbow (1d6) or below
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Petrifying gaze, poisonous blood, Sticks to Snakes, magic to-hit, regenerate (2 hp/rd), immortal, magic resistance (60%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

A greater medusa has the lower body of a giant rattlesnake.  They possess the
innate spell ability of Sticks to Snakes.  In combat, the greater medusa
prefers distance attacks such as its gaze or its shortbow (can shoot twice per
round). Her arrows are normally poisoned (save or die). If forced into close
melee, she will attack twice per round with any two of the following four
options:

1) Fangs (1d8 plus poison, save or die).
2) Shortsword (1d6).
3) Snake hair (1d4 snakes for 1 + poison, save or die each).
4) Tail Slam (2d6).

The blood of a medusa is poisonous even to the touch. If harvested and used
within one week, will force a struck opponent to save or die. The following
week, the blood will weaken considerably and only provide an additional 1d6
damage beyond normal weapon damage before decomposing beyond use.

The head of a greater medusa can also be harvested and used as a gaze attack
for one week.  However, each time the head is used in this fashion, there is
a 15% chance that one of the snakes will bite the user (save versus Poison or
die). There is also a 5% chance that PCs will accidentally meet the gaze of
the head (saving throw allowed) and turn themselves into stone. The head can
be used in this fashion for one week.

## modified and merged with barrowmaze version
##Credit: The Greater Medusa originally appeared in the Second Edition Monstrous
##Compendium I (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1989) and is used by permission.
##
##Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Wizards
##of the Coast.

##Art Objects
##The finest sculptor in the kingdom works in a large, brick building,
##exceptionally grand. The building has a large, heavy iron door that is
##usually kepy locked, for the sculptor does not care to be interupted while
##at work. The sculptor is an old, blind man whose work decorates the
##temples and palaces of the kingdom. He does not take commissions of
##living people, but claims the images he sculpts are delivered to him in his
##dreams by his muse.
##The workshop is visited daily by a serving wench from the largest inn
##in the city. She is the only person the genius will allow in his workshop,
##and she only visits for a few moments to bring him his daily repast (he
##eats but once per day, though the meal is quite large). The woman is often
##quizzed as to what wonders the sculptor is currently creating, but she
##always reports the same thing - everything hidden beneath large tarps.
##Once a month, a gang of laborers delivers several large slabs of stone,
##setting them up around the shop and then leaving.
##A loose floor tile in the workshop gives one access to a subterranean
##river located about 30 feet below the workshop. The river runs from the
##mountain kingdom of a greater medusa. The sculptor once performed a
##great service for the medusa, ridding her of a terrible melancholy with a
##clever riddle. He alone of his party of adventurers survived this encounter,
##due to his lack of sight and his quick wit.
##In exchange for his service, the greater medusa sends one of her two
##daughters (normal medusas) down the river once per month along with a
##bodyguard of goblins and several men and women taken by the medusa
##as tribute from the barbarian tribes of the mountains. No more than four
##or five captives make their way to the sculptor's workshop, where they
##are drugged, posed and then turned to stone by the medusas. Monies paid
##to the sculptor are sent back to the greater medusa with the sculptor's
##compliments, he only retaining what he needs to pay for his meals and his
##“raw materials”. These raw materials are chipped away into gravel and
##tossed into the subterranean river.


True Gorgon, Sthenno
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18 (75 hp)
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack: 2 claws (1d10), bite (1d8), snakes (1d6 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Petrifying gaze, poisonous blood, Sticks to Snakes, +2 or better weapon to hit, regenerate (2 hp/rd), immortal, immunities, magic resistance (60%)
Move: 12/21 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 26/6200

The sisters’ gaze turns people to stone permanently. The poisonous bites of
their snakes are deadly.  Sthenno and Euryale are immune to polymorph, sleep,
stunning and paralysis.

Sthenno and Euryale long for their sister's return or their meeting with
her in the Underworld. Yet being immortal, they cannot enter the Realm
of the Dead. Thus, both know they will never see their beloved sibling
again. Their cries are said to be audible on the wind as a high-pitched
shrill akin to a bird's cry.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

True Gorgon, Euryale
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20 (80 hp)
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack: 2 claws (1d10), bite (1d8), snakes (1d6 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Petrifying gaze, poisonous blood, Sticks to Snakes, +2 or better weapon to hit, regenerate (2 hp/rd), immortal, immunities, magic resistance (65%)
Move: 12/21 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 28/6800

##Though the word gorgon is often associated with the deadly bull-like
##creature that turns a victim to stone with its breath weapon, the true
##gorgons are three sisters; Euryale, Sthenno, and Medusa. They are
##the daughters of the god Phorcys and the goddess Ceto. Euryale and
##Sthenno were born immortal and are hideous creatures with writing
##snakes for hair, brass claws, wings, and a gaze that can turn any living
##creature into stone. Phorcys tasked them with guarding the entrance to
##the Underworld.
##
##Medusa was born mortal and was very beautiful. Phorcys sent her to
##the Material Plane so all could gaze upon the beauty of his daughter.
##Medusa's beauty rivaled that of some of the goddesses, and some of them
##grew jealous of Medusa, particularly the goddess Athena. Her beauty also
##turned the heads of some of the gods, and when Poseidon seduced her in a
##temple to Athena, the goddess became enraged and changed the beautiful
##Medusa into a creature as hideous as her sisters. Poseidon turned from
##his love, never to return again. Medusa, enraged, fled into the desert and
##never came back to civilization.
##
##The hero Perseus was tasked with killing the gorgon known as Medusa
##and bringing her head to King Polydectes as a wedding present. Using a
##magic shield given to him by the gods, he avoided Medusa's deadly gaze
##and severed her head. From her serpentine body sprang the children of
##Poseidon, creatures similar in appearance to their mother. These creatures
##escaped into the world and are called medusa.

The sisters’ gaze turns people to stone permanently. The poisonous bites of
their snakes are deadly.  Sthenno and Euryale are immune to polymorph, sleep,
stunning and paralysis.

Sthenno and Euryale long for their sister's return or their meeting with
her in the Underworld. Yet being immortal, they cannot enter the Realm
of the Dead. Thus, both know they will never see their beloved sibling
again. Their cries are said to be audible on the wind as a high-pitched
shrill akin to a bird's cry.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Forgotten Sisters
Far to the north there is a bare stone promontory that juts into a frozen
sea. Over this a piercing wind howls as it carries poisonous words and
fierce shrieks. The rocky coasts of the promontory are inhabited by
especially large and powerful harpies. Atop the promontory dwell the two
true gorgons, Sthenno and Euryale.
The great scaled queens of the damned, whispering foul curses and
wicked temptations and launching them out on the winds to find the ears
of gullible men and women. The gorgons guard a chest of lead, unlocked,
that contains a wide-brimmed hat of invisibility and sandals of flying.
The hat and sandals were owned by the hero Perseus, and if touched by
creatures with fewer than nine levels cause them to burst into flame (6d6
damage, no save).

Gorilla Bear
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Squeeze
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Gorilla bears are the result of a magical crossbreeding and merging of
two distinct species: a gorilla and a black bear. A gorilla bear's fur is
always dark and ranges in color from jet black to brownish-black. Its
paws and feet end in elongated nails, brown in color. A typical gorilla bear
stands 8 feet tall and weighs almost 1,700 pounds. Its eyes are always one
of two colors: crimson or emerald green. No other eye color has ever been
seen on a gorilla bear (though legends speak of an immensely powerful
white-furred gorilla bear with eyes the color of amethysts). Gorilla bears
make their lairs in caves or caverns, often hidden among the twisted
tangle of trees and shrubs of jungles. They are diurnal hunters and feast
on a diet of meat, savoring the taste of goblins and elves. A typical lair
contains a mated pair and 1d4 young. A gorilla bear that hits a victim with
both claw attacks squeezes them for 1d8+1 points of damage.

Credit: The Gorilla Bear originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Cricky
Hitchcock.

Experiment Gone Wrong
The map discovered in the crypt leads to an enormous crater filled with
a thick, tanged wood of bloated trees and pale, sickly plants. The crater's
scalloped edges descend 90 feet to the floor of the crater, where their
air is heavy and has an acrid, unpleasant smell. It was formed when the
skull of a dead god of sorcery (or some other elder thing as dictated by
one's campaign) emerged from the astral plane and streaked through the
atmosphere, slamming into the ground.
The skull, eight feet in diameter, is now buried 10 feet under ground and
formed of crystal adamantine - a tempting prize for any dwarf. The soil
around ground zero of the crater is rich in pitchblende, a uranium ore often
used in the creation of magic items. The air in the crater is tainted with
a subtle poison that slowly turns those who breath it into monstrosities
called gorilla bears. Hundreds of these misbegotten creatures lurk in the
woods, with encounters with 1d4+2 of the monsters occuring on a roll of
1-2 on 1d6 made hourly.

Grave Risen
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 8 [11] or 7[12] with shield
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4+2 + blood poisoning)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Animate dead, blood poisoning
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Grave risen are rotting, worm-ridden, walking corpses draped in tattered
and loosely fitting rags or outfitted in dented and rusted armor. Blackened
eye sockets grant it sight and its body still clings to the stench of death.
The clawed hands of a grave risen are filthy; its nails long and caked with
dirt and soil from its grave. Once per day, a grave risen can animate up to
10 HD of corpses within 100 feet as zombies. A grave risen's claws are
coated with a deadly poison that infects the blood.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Pampered Dead
A fire recently devastated the mill in Jodea, a careless flame igniting the
sawdust into a blazing inferno that killed 12 men. A few climbed from
the burning debris, only to collapse with their lungs on fire. The town
mourned as the workers were buried them in the small cemetery. Three
nights later, someone dug up the bodies.

The recent dead weren’t stolen; they got up and walked out of the
graveyard after a grave risen passed through. The creature animated the
recent dead to join its growing retinue of zombies.

PCs who follow the many footsteps leading out of the small cemetery
uncover a horrid band of 20 zombies lurching across the countryside.
Six of the undead carry a wooden palanquin on their rotting shoulders,
struggling to support its weight. The litter has four wooden poles on the
side that support rotting funeral shroud curtains.

A bloated grave risen rests aboard a palanquin. The undead creature
wears a dirt-soiled toga and has a silver crown perched on its withered
head. The creature's massive bulk wobbles from side to side with each
lurching step of its servants. The grave risen's sharp claws are black and
twisted, with cemetery dirt falling in dark specks in the palanquin's wake.
Despite its bulk, however, the grave risen is fast and vicious, and attacks
by leaping from its palanquin directly toward PCs.

Gray Nisp
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Rend
Move: 6/18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Gray nisps resemble hairless humanoids with smooth, slick skin;
their hands and feet are webbed and end in claws, and their faces have
large, dark pupilless eyes. They have no noses or ears, and its small
fishlike mouth is filled with tiny, sharp teeth. Gray nisps are 9 feet tall,
with light gray skin and a white underbelly, and weighs well over 300
pounds. If a gray nisp hits with both claws, it rends for an additional 2d6
points of damage. A gray nisp cannot survive on dry land.

Snatcher of Children
The town of Niborlyn has a reputation as a quaint and serene coastal
village. The villager virtually shuts down at night (aside from a multitude
of cats) as the doors and windows are boarded and locked. Legends
say that a beast emerges from the sea each night to feast on the flesh of
children who disobey their parents. Although no one has ever seen the
monster from the ocean, all in town really believe it to be true.
The legend is partially accurate. A grey nisp lives just offshore in a rocky
overhang. It mostly makes an easy living off of the refuse and catches of
the fishing villages. Content with easy meals, it has no reason to hunt.
With the recent lack of discarded fish parts, however, the gray nisp
began to snatch fishermen and locals who came too
close to the water. Magdalena, a fishmonger's
wife, lost her husband. While she cares little for
the man, he had told her about a sunken ship he
discovered before his disappearance. He claimed
the ship carried chests of smuggled silver bound for
Bargarsport. He carved a crude map of the wreckage on the mast of his
skiff. The people of the village are too involved with their cats to offer
any aid. She pleads with travelers to aid her in finding the location of his
ship – and him if he's still alive. (See more about life in Niborlyn in the
Gray Malkin entry.)

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Graymalkin, Common
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: 2 claws, 1 bite (1 point of damage
each)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Level drain, fascination
Move: 10
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Graymalkins are magical creatures that resemble ordinary cats. To the casual
observer, a graymalkin appear to be nothing more than a raggedy-looking cat
with nothing unusual about it. This disguise aids the graymalkin in its
travels, allowing it to move unmolested among living creatures.

A graymalkin can fascinate a single opponent (save resists). A creature that
fails its save “adopts” the graymalkin as a pet, clinging to the cat and
always keeping it close by. The effect is similar to a charm person spell.

Once inside their owner's house, a graymalkin uses its special abilities to
kill its owner and any other family members. Such attacks usually occur
at night (in the case of the slinker) or over a period of time (in the case of
the tether).

Graymalkins always dwell near populated areas, preferring cities to
towns, towns to villages, and so on. They often choose an owner (a living
creature they deem gullible and easily manipulated) and convince that
creature to take them home with them (by using their fascination ability).

Graymalkins are often found serving as the familiar to an evil spellcaster
or hag. They prefer females to males when serving as a familiar and very
rarely do they ever use their special abilities against their true owner.
(Some tales say that when a graymalkin is serving as a familiar, its master
is actually immune to its special abilities.)

Graymalkins avoid direct confrontations with opponents, preferring
to attack helpless or otherwise unobservant foes. If forced into battle, a
graymalkin seeks escape as quick as possible.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.


Graymalkin, Tether
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d4 hp
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: 1 bite (1 point of damage)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Charm
Move: 10
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: A/5

Tether are graymalkins with very long tails. A tether can fascinate a single
opponent (save resists). A creature that fails its save “adopts” the tether as
a pet, clinging to the cat and always keeping it close by. The effect is
similar to a charm person spell. Once inside their owner's house, a tether
kills its owner and any family members. A tether drains 1 level per hour from
a charmed victim. A saving throw negates each level drain, but does not break
the charm.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Graymalkin, Slinker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: 2 claws, 1 bite (1 point of damage each)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Breath stealing, fascination
Move: 10
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

A slinker is referred to in legend as a witch cat, hell cat, or demonic cat that
creeps into a family's house and steals the breath from their sleeping children.
It appears as a large graymalkin. A slinker can fascinate a single opponent (save
resists). A creature that fails its save “adopts” the slinker as a pet, clinging to
the cat and always keeping it close by. The effect is similar to a charm person
spell. Once inside their owner's house, a slinker kills its owner and any family
members at night by sucking the air from their lungs as they sleep (save resists).
If the save fails, the victim loses a quarter of its hp. A successful save
means the victim awakens, although it is still charmed.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Cat's Meow
The fishing town of Niborlyn has always offered a peaceful and serene
life for its citizens. The villagers live quietly, always looking down upon
anything that forces them to deviate from the norm. Two years ago, the
town elder Prelli Fishmeal adopted a slinker gray malkin found floating
on wreckage from a lost ship. Prelli immediately fell in love with the
animal and the creature has not left her side since that day. Over the years,
the town has changed, and not for the better.
By charming Prelli, the gray malkin has methodically turned the town
into a cat-worshipping cult. Thousands of cats fill the streets and homes
of Niborlyn. Fields of catnip have replaced most crops, and massive
sandboxes line the streets. Dogs are strictly forbidden anywhere near the
village. Cat idols have replaced shrines to the sea gods. Fish and milk
are standard rations for people and “pets” alike. Even the townspeople's
clothing is made from spun cat hair. The townsfolk continually try to
outdo one another by acquiring larger cats. Many of the more well-to-do
keep large felines such as cougars, ocelots and tigers. The town has even
attracted the attention of a weretiger.
The current state of Niborlyn does not please every citizen. Many of
the older citizens hide their religious practices to the old gods. They may
approach visitors to assist them in figuring out what has befallen their
beloved town.

Gremlin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6 hp
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d2), 1 bite (1d2) or 1 weapon (1d4)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Magic resistance (15%), +1 magic weapon needed
to hit, invisible
Move: 10
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

the tables. Common pranks the gremlin plays are putting tadpoles in
tankards, lighting of tinder twigs in boots, shaving a PC's horse, putting
black powder in pipes, entwining boot laces, placing rotten potatoes in
backpacks and pouches, loosening saddles on horses, greasing sword
hilts and door knobs, placing bees in wineskins, removing arrowheads,
spilling drinks on crotches and unloosening armor straps loosened. The
Game Referee should feel free to make up more annoyances to torment
the PCs with.
Hoo Saw feels indebted to anyone who aids him in getting his life back
on track. If his treasure is found, he hands over the deed to The Vulgar
Satyr (the chess piece comes with the tavern) and leaves on a permanent
vacation.

Gremlins are wicked faerie folk who revel in destruction and mayhem.
They resemble a goblin with long floppy ears, pinched wrinkled faces,
nasty claws, a mouth full of sharp teeth and a wicked glint to its eyes. A
gremlin stands 3-1/2 feet tall and weighs about 40 pounds. Bright light
blinds gremlins for 1 turn. They do an additional 1d6 points of damage to
surprised opponents. Gremlins can turn invisible at will.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Misadventure
After a few very profitable years, Hooghly Slaw (Hoo Saw to his few
friends) has quit adventuring. But his dream of owning a tavern didn’t
turn out so well. He now owns a defunct tavern named “The Vulgar
Satyr”.
Sixteen years ago, Hoo Saw found a locked chest while exploring ruins
deep in the Hollow Spire Mountains. The locked chest contained a single
wooden chess piece: a pawn. Intrigued by such a unique find,
Hoo Saw kept the piece. Hoo Saw's misfortunes began
that fateful day, and they’ve not let up.
Unbeknownst to the adventurer, the chest was
a prison for a gremlin named Booglar who
has followed and tormented poor Hoo Saw
ever since he released the creature. Hoo Saw's
attempts at adventuring, operating a successful
business, finding a mate, even ending his life
have all met with disastrous results because
of the gremlin. The miserable Hoo Saw takes
every misfortune in stride, however, which
annoys Booglar to no end.
The Vulgar Satyr isn’t a total money pit that
Hoo Saw believes it to be, though. Over the
years, Booglar has hidden nearly all of Hoo
Saw's money within the tavern's stucco walls.
Hoo Saw is in fact a very wealthy individual
– if he could only discover the years of profit
and treasure hidden in the walls around him.
Booglar leaves just enough money for Hoo
Saw to survive in misery. The Vulgar Satyr's
only patrons are vagrants, drunkards, prostitutes
and the deranged. Booglar takes great pleasure
in tormenting anyone other than the dregs of
society who visit the tavern.
The chess pawn sits on a table without chairs
in the center of the room. Despite Hoo Saw's
efforts to get rid of the game piece, it always
returns. Hoo Saw has noticed that when he
destroys the piece, it returns looking slightly
different. He long ago accepted his bad luck
and has given up on ever getting rid of the
cursed chess piece.
None of the tables or chairs in the bar has
level legs. Eating utensils are bent, and bowls
and wooden tankards have small annoying leaks.
Randomly loosened floorboards tilt to harmlessly
hit clients in the face or back. Sand taints the salt and spice jars on

Grimm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Magic resistance (35%), +1 magic weapons or
better needed to hit, death aura
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

This monstrous beast stands well over 9 feet tall and has glistening black
flesh. Its head is oval with deep sunken black eyes. Its mouth is wide and
large and sports double rows of razor-sharp fangs. A purplish-black
tongue flicks in and out of its mouth. The monster's powerful
arms and legs end in filthy wicked claws that sport broken,
black fingernails. A grimm stands 9 feet tall and weighs
more than 1,200 pounds. A grimm drains life from Lawful
creatures, dealing 1d6 points of damage each round.

Ebbing Acres
The extensive farmstead of the Ebbing family
has remained profitable for generations. As wealthy
landowners, the Ebbing family has made many
enemies with their aggressive style of farming and their
questionable ethics. None of the locals has seen any
member of the Ebbing family for weeks, however. Even
more mysteriously, no one has returned from attempts
to contact them. Acres of neglected and wilting crops
surround the homestead and barn.
The Ebbing family and their farmhands stand in the
yard crucified in a circle upon wooden crossbeams.
Their bodies bear no wounds and appear to be
drained of blood. The corpses are surrounded
by the carcasses of thousands of birds, rodents
and vermin. Livestock and crops alike look
as if all their fluids have been drained as
well. Two grimms living under the family's
home caused the deaths of the scavengers
and livestock with their life-draining aura.
The grimms slowly tortured the crucified
people with their presence.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Grimstalker (Banaan)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4+1 + poison) or 1 weapon (1d6+1)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Poison, spell-like abilities
Move: 6/3 (climb)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

The grimstalker is a fey creature that does not share the beauty and
goodness of its kin. They are hairless humanoid fey, slender and graceful,
with long arms and legs. The grimstalker's skin is brown and woody,
almost having the texture and hardness of tree bark, and their hands
are tipped in sharp claws that drip toxic venom with the consistency
of pinesap. They often decorate themselves with leaves and vines that
actually take root in their skin and cover them with a protective layer as
thick as leather armor. Grimstalkers deliver a paralytic poison with each
claw attack that stuns victims for 1d4+1 rounds. Grimstalkers can cast
plant growth and warp wood three times per day.

Hey Mr. Tally Man
Rows of banana trees stand on the grounds of the abandoned Horstman
Plantation, ripening bunches of bananas hanging down from the serrated
fronds. The ground is covered by patches of unruly grasses and piled high
with rotting bananas. The grass causes flesh to itch and sting, and fire
ants crawl in long lines over the ground. Other than the macaws calling
through the trees, the banana farm is silent.
The pickers fled three days ago when a troupe of grimstalkers moved
in and began terrorizing the farmhands. The miniature assassins drove
poisoned splinters into the bananas, left snare traps in the thick grass,
and even lured a corrupt banana tree treant onto the plantation. The
grimstalkers consider the plantation their ancestral land and attack
any trespassers. The grimstalkers ride in the banana tree treant, pelting
enemies with poisoned arrows.

Banana Tree Treant (8HD): HD 8; AC 2[17]; Atk 2 strikes (2d6);
Move 6; Save 8; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Control trees.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Grippli
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  Weapon (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Marsh move
Move: 12/12 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Gripplis are short, bipedal tree frogs that dwell in swamps and marshes.
They can move upright or on all fours. A grippli stands 2 to 2-1/2 feet tall
and weighs from 40 to 50 pounds. Its eyes are yellow with vertical-slit
pupils of black. Gripplis often wear brightly colored or decorated clothes.
They are attracted to and love brightly colored items. Gripplis
speak their own language and some speak common or
elven. Gripplis can move across marshlands, swamps,
and mud without any penalty to their movement.
Grippli characters can take levels in fighter (up to
5th level) or thief (up to 7th level). They can see in the
dark as well as elves and enjoy a +5% bonus to climb
walls (maximum 99%).

Frog God House
Amidst the thick aerial prop roots of an ancient
banyan, a tribe of 30 grippli adults and their 15
young. The grippli dwell in tiny huts of mud and
grass, climbing into the tree to hunt lizards and
gather figs. The grippli arm themselves with spears
and slings and brew a powerful fig wine. The village
is lead by a grippli who can cast spells as a 3rd level
cleric or druid. A large hut in the middle of the village
contains the tribe's nine eggs guarded by four large grippli
with obsidian-bladed axes. In the upper branches of the banyan tree there
is a thing the grippli refer to as the “god house”.
The god house is the pinnacle of an ancient stone temple that was
engulfed and mostly destroyed by the banyan in its youth. The peak of
the temple, decorated with reliefs of dancing apsaras, now rests in the
branches about 200 feet above the forest floor. One can enter the “god
house” through a tiny hole. The interior is covered by a growth of orange
crystals that the grippli believe allow communication with spirits, for
they hum in the presence of light. The grippli's priestly leader carries a
bronze lantern as part of her gear.

Credit: The Grippli originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Groaning Spirit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Incorporeal touch (1d8 + chill touch)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Chill touch, fear aura, keening, immunity to cold
and electricity, magic resistance (50%), unnatural aura,
vulnerability
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

The groaning spirit is the malevolent spirit of a female elf that is found
haunting swamps, fens, moors, and other desolate places. Groaning spirits hate
the living and seek to destroy whomever they meet. A groaning spirit appears
as a translucent image of her former self.

Anyone viewing a groaning spirit must succeed on a saving throw or flee in
terror for 1d6+4 rounds. Damage caused by the groaning spirit's touch attack
sends a chilling cold through an opponent's body. Any creature touched must
succeed on a saving throw or suffer 1 point of Strength drain. Groaning
spirits are the bane of other undead, and any undead they touch (except other
groaning spirits) must succeed on a saving throw or flee in fear for 2d6
rounds.

Once per day, at night only, a groaning spirit can release a death wail
audible to a range of 1 mile. All creatures within 30 feet of the groaning
spirit must make a successful saving throw or die. Those that make their save
still take 3d6 points of damage.

If a spellcaster uses holy word against a groaning spirit, the creature must
succeed on a saving throw or die immediately.

Murder on High Street
A large city of granite walls tinted red from rust of the curved
copper roofs on its tall, thin buildings has curved streets paved
with chalk and lined with crowded, noisy shops. A single
main street, the High Street, once thronged with people but
has been abandoned due to the presence of a groaning spirit.
The spirit once belonged to an elf, the victim of a murderous
baker on the High Street.

The bakery is the tallest building in the area, with a
mechanical clock tower on which a clockwork knight slays a
clockwork dragon every hour on the hour. The bakery specializes
in hot cross buns, tongue sandwiches (sheep tongues for a copper,
beef tongues for a silver, peacock tongues for a platinum) and sticky
pastries made with honey and almonds.

The baker concealed the body in a barrel of flour in his cellar, and until
the body is found and properly buried, the spirit cannot rest. A number
of brave knights have lost their lives to the groaning spirit, including the
king's favorite nephew. Destroying the creature is probably a fine way to
endear the king to a band of otherwise unwelcome adventurers.

Credit: The Groaning Spirit originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Gronk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 2 slams (1d6) and horn (1d8), or 1 weapon (1d8)
and horn (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Gronks are the typical big, dumb brutes; a male gronk is on average
approximately 9 feet tall, with females only slightly smaller. Gronks have
mottled gray skin and shaggy brown hair that is thickest at its head and
shoulders and gradually thins out around its waist. The arms and legs of
a gronk are massive, like tree limbs attached to its thick barrel-like torso.
The face of a gronk seems almost lost amid the long hair hanging from its
head. The most notable feature of a gronk's face is the long, rhinoceroslike horn between its eyes.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Pitted Plains
A nomadic tribe of gronks has excavated huge pits throughout the
rolling hills of a vast grassland. The gronks have worked long and hard
through the years carefully digging the vast pits. The Horncrunk gronks,
under the command of their tribal leader Uooteg, are fiercely territorial
and secretive about their digging project.
The tribe has managed to domesticate rhinoceroses and yaks to aid in
their quarrying activities and to serve as mounts and guards. Guard rhinos
are leashed by heavy iron chains tethered to spiked collars. Occasionally,
the gronks find something useful such as minor magical items left
over from ancient wars. While unreceptive of intruders, diplomatic
negotiations may avoid combat but won’t divulge the reason for the dig.
In fact, the gronks aren’t sure either why they are digging the land. Some
years ago, Uooteg had a dream of a buried weapon (a warhammer shaped
like a boar) and convinced the tribe that this vision was a quest from the
gods to find this weapon. Thus far, their work has yielded little.

Gryph
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Touch (attach) or beak (1d8)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Attach, implant eggs
Move: 3/21 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Gryphs are small, jet-black birds about the size of eagles. They have
four, six or eight legs and needle-like beaks. Gryphs are found in
dungeons, ruins, and caverns. They are typically scavengers, feeding on
dead rodents and other small animals, but in times when food is scarce
they take on a more predatory role and become hunters, craving the flesh
and blood of warm-blooded creatures. If a gryph hits with a touch attack,
it uses its legs to latch onto the opponent's body. A female gryph that
gets a hold injects 1d4 eggs into the host's bloodstream from a tiny thin
tube projected from the creature's abdomen. Each day thereafter, the host
takes 1d6 points of constitution damage and suffers a –2 penalty to hit and
make saving throws until cured or until the eggs hatch. At the end of the
third day, the eggs hatch and 1d4 young gryphs burst forth from the host's
body. If the host is still alive when this happens, he immediately takes
2d6 points of Constitution damage. A cure disease spell rids a victim of
the eggs.

Credit: The Gryph originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (© TSR/
Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Peter
Brown.

Hell's Plumbers
This cavern is 40 feet high, with walls that slant down to the floor of the
cavern, which is 60 feet long and about 12 feet wide. Twelve thick pipes
span the cavern from wall to wall, about half of them warm and the other
half cold. A bloated corpse is slung over one of the warm pipes incubating
7 gryph eggs.
A throng of 1d8+7 male gryphs (plus one female per 3 males) inhabit
this cavern, roosting on the warm pipes. The pipes do not carry water, but
rather move tortured souls between different planes of Hell. Rupturing
a pipe releases the souls in the form of 2d6 screeching shadows. Such
a rupture is likely if one is attacking the gryphs with sharp or piercing
weapons. If such a rupture does occur, an imp is oily overalls will appear
in 1d4+1 rounds to repair it. If the adventurers are not busy, it will make a
clumsy attempt at trading its plumbing services for a soul.

Gutslug
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d4 + blood drain)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Blood drain
Move: 6/12 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A gutslug is a slimy, sticky worm that resembles entrails. The body is
a lumpy, veined, gray tube approximately 10 feet long but usually no
thicker than an inch in diameter. Gutslugs have no eyes, and their mouth
is large, round, and resembles the suckered mouth of a leech. A gutslug
latches onto a victim with a successful bite, automatically draining blood
for 1d4 points of damage each round until it drains a total of 8 hp
or is removed.

A Slug in the Gut
The Capering Satyr is throwing a bash to beat all parties to celebrate the
owner's recent good fortune. The party's been going for a week so far, with
little signs of slowing down. Revelers come and go, and new kegs are brought
up from the cellar every hour. The owner, Borum, won’t talk about how he came
into his wealth, but whispering bar patrons claim he found a gold vein in the
Whispering Forest.  Borum did indeed find gold, but only after he tricked
a leprechaun and stole its treasure. The leprechaun, an angry little fey named
Marn McLir, searched high and low and just recently found the bar owner. Now
that he's found the barkeep, his ire is about to be unleashed. Marn broke into
the cellar and “improved” a keg by stuffing 50 gutslugs into the barrel. He
rigged the keg to explode in a blast of splinters that launches the gutslugs
over the entire bar crowd.  PCs partying in the bar find themselves covered in
the slimy entrail-like worms.

All the while, Marn McLir dances in the rafters, laughing at the sport
below.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Half-Ogre
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Two-handed sword (2d6+1) or spear (1d6+1)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Half-ogres are rare crossbreeds of human and ogre. Standing a few feet
shorter than their ogre kin and a few feet taller than their human kin, halfogres have strength as well as speed and intelligence (relative to other
ogres) in their favor. Their skin and hair color generally match that of
their ogre parent, with dark tones such as gray, brown, or olive being the
most prevalent. Half-ogres speak the common tongue, and those with an
intelligence score of at least 10 also speak ogre.

Half-ogres, though generally outcasts among humans and feared for
their ugliness and size, can find some acceptance among ogres. Halfogres in an ogre band need to prove themselves constantly to their larger
kin, however. For this reason, half-ogres found among an ogre band are
cruel, violent, and strong; weaker half-ogres usually wind up in the stew
pot. Most half-ogres found among full-blooded ogres are leaders of the
ogre band or are at least well on their way to becoming leaders. Their long
years suffering the harsh treatment of their kin help half-ogres develop a
sense of cunning and a strong will to survive. Therefore, ogres under the
leadership of a half-ogre fight more effectively, even engaging in planned
ambushes and complicated tactics that are beyond most ogres.

On rare occasions, half-ogres collect into hybrid communities of other
half-ogre races (such as orogs and ogrillons) or humanoids (such as
orcs and half-orcs). These rogue bands of outcasts form bandit clans or
marauding groups that are the bane of other humanoid communities in
their area.

Half-Ogres as Characters Half-ogre leaders tend to be barbaric fighters and can
advance to the 6th level of ability (7th level if their strength score is 13
or higher). Half-ogre clerics worship “the Destroyer” and can advance to the
4th level of ability (5th level if their wisdom is 15 or higher). Half-ogres
can also multi-class as fighter/clerics, reaching a maximum of 5th level as
fighters and 3rd level as clerics.  Half-Ogre enjoy a +1 bonus to strength and
constitution and a -1 penalty to intelligence and charisma at character
creation. These modifications cannot take an ability score over 18 or below 3.
Half-ogres begin their careers with one additional hit dice (1d6).  Half-ogres
can see in darkness as well as a dwarf.

Credit: The Half-Ogre originally appeared in Dragon #29 (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1979) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original material by
Gary Gygax.

Half Ogre, All Bandit
A gang of 1d3+1 half-ogre bandits has taken up residence in an
abandoned watchtower that overlooks the moor road. The bandits wear
hides and pelts (treat as leather armor) and carry a variety of hand
weapons, including 4 javelins each. The leader of the band, a 3rd level
fighter, recently lost a challenge he intitiated against the ogre chief of his
former tribe. He now bears a nasty scar across his bald head for the effort.
The band has set up a rather ingenious (for ogres) device to attack
passing caravans. The moor road runs directly past the watchtower. The
half-ogres station themselves on the roof, where they have a thick rope
tied between a crenelation and a large, loose piece of masonry. At the
direction of a spotter, two ogres heave the heavy block off the roof in the
opposite direction of the road. The rope then turns the heavy block into
a powerful, pendulum like projectile that smashes into wagons and often
kills or wounds horses or oxen. The half-ogres then, still on the roof,
proceed to hurl smaller stones and javelins at the caravan until it gives up
and flees the harassment.
So far, the half-ogres have managed to gather 20 head of goats (worth
1 gp each, penned behind the watchtower), 30 pounds of millet (worth 9
gp), five pounds of lentils (worth 1 gp), two square yards of lace (weighs
6 pounds, worth 10 gp), 20 pounds of red dye (worth 10 gp), 10 pounds
of blue dye (worth 10 gp, in a barrel), 10 pounds of gum arabic (worth
10 gp), two barrels of ale (30 gallons, 250 pounds, worth 6 gp each), a
granite holy icon (worth 65 gp to a dwarf), a bag of dust of disappearance
(thrown to the side, deemed worthless), a soapstone bust of Millard
Fillmore (worth 1d4 x 10 gp, once owned by a famous plane-hopping
magic-user), 1d6 x 100 cp and 1d4 x 100 sp.

Hanged Man
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Hangman's rope
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A hanged man appears much as it did in life, though its skin is pale and
pulled tight over its bones. Its head hangs at an odd angle, unsupported
by its shattered neck bones. A rotted noose and several feet of rope hang
from its neck and trail off behind it as it walks. Its eyes have no pupils. A
hanged man can only utter choked gurgles, gasps and strangled moans. It
uses the rope that killed it to snare victims and drag them into the hanged
man's waiting claws. The rope can be cast up to 20 feet away, and wraps
around creatures with a successful hit.

The Well Hanged Man
The rotting corpses of 10 pirates and thieves hang from a
scaffold outside of the village of Arndale. Crows sit haughtily
on the corpses, cawing at anyone who approaches.
The village is empty, a ghost town sitting beside the sea.
Buildings are vacant, with doors and windows wide open.
Bloody scratches mar many wooden floors. People appear
to have been dragged from their houses, clawing frantically
for their lives.
A small 8-foot-diameter well sits in the center of town,
a rope hanging over the stone ledge trailing down into the
darkness. The rope twitches feebly.
A hanged man entered a cave network under Arndale
a week ago. The creature discovered a dry well that let it
move about the town without being noticed. The creature
picked off victims every night, casting some down the well to
savor later. The creature waits at the bottom of the hole. The noose tied
around its neck hangs over the top of the well to snatch prey who might
try to give it a good yank.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Hangman Tree
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  4 vines (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Hallucinatory spores, magic resistance (45%),
strangle, swallow, surprise on 1-4 on 1d6
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

Hangman trees look like nothing more than giant oak trees. Close
inspection reveals a scar-like marking on the lower part of the trunk
(this is where undigested creatures or gear is expelled after digestion).
Hidden among the hangman tree's branches and leaves are its ropelike appendages that it uses to trap its prey. Hangman trees can speak
broken Common. The hangman tree attacks by dropping its noose-like
appendages around prey and yanking victims upwards. Trapped prey
is held until it dies or is dropped into the hangman's trunk where it is
digested. Hangman trees have no visual organs but can ascertain all foes
within 60 feet using sound, scent, and vibration.

Opponents struck by a vine in combat must pass a saving throw or be
strangled for 1d6+1 points of damage per round until the vine is cut (it
has an AC of 4 [15] and can take 6 hp damage) or the strangled victim
or a rescuer makes a successful open doors check. The hangman tree can
attempt to swallow a strangling (or strangled) victim with a successful
attack roll and a failed saving throw by the target. A swallowed victim
suffers 2d6 points of crushing damage per round and can only escape
with a successful open doors check. The tree's trunk can hold up to two
human-sized victims.

Besides the danger of its vines and trunk, a hangman tree can also release
a cloud of spores in a 50-foot radius spread. Creatures in the area must
succeed on a saving throw or believe the tree to be of some ordinary sort
or to be a treant or other such friendly tree creature. An affected creature
becomes passive for 2d6 rounds and refuses to attack the hangman tree
during this time.

A hangman tree takes half again as much (+50%) damage as normal
from electricity, regardless of whether a saving throw is allowed, or if
the save is a success or failure. Cold-based effects paralyze a hangman
tree as if by a hold monster spell. Spells that generate darkness slow the
hangman tree (as the slow spell) for 1 round per caster level.

Credit: The Hangman Tree originally appeared in EX1 Dungeonland (© TSR/
Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Grim God of the Wood
A tunnel you have been traversing for the last hour ends in a flight of
wide steps of black and white marble. They lead up maybe 60 feet to
perpendicular tunnel. This new tunnel is arched and clad in checked black
and white tiles. It is about 10 feet wide and 15 feet high and seems to run
for at least one mile in either direction. Dried animal droppings in the
tunnel suggest that it is an underground highway. Should one proceed
east, they will eventually come to a point where the tunnel slants upward,
disgorging travelers into a thick woodland of oaks. This woodland is
inhabited by several tribes of goblins, discernable by the different colors
of their ears and memorable for the violent hatred they feel towards one
another. One tribe is particularly hated, for it dwells on the fringes of a
meadow of sweet grasses and forget-me-nots in which dwells the “Grim
God of the Wood”. The god is a large, ancient hangman tree and the tribe
that dwells closest to him holds the position of the “high holy tribe” and
lords this rank over the others.
As one approaches the meadow of the Grim God, they will almost
certainly encounter members of the high holy tribe, goblins with grayfringed ears in leather armor and carrying shields, spears and daggers.
Encounters with 1d4+4 goblins should be diced for once every hour,
occuring on a roll of 1 in 4. The goblins will make an attempt to capture
characters, using lassos that they throw from the branches. Captives
are brought to the edge of the meadow and driven into it by the massed
goblins of the high holy tribe, their hands unbound but weaponless (this
strikes the goblins as a “fair fight”).
A possible treasure for the high holy tribe consists of 1d4 x 1,000 gp,
1d4 x 1,000 sp, an obsidian mask worth 135 gp, a terracotta oil lamp
decorated with black and white porpoises worth 135 gp and a wooden
figuring of a child worth 45 gp.

Haunt
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Ghostly touch (1d4 plus 1d3 dexterity)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Alternate form, dexterity damage, immune to
turning, malevolence, rejuvenation, strangle, vulnerabilities
Move: 9/12 (flying)
Alignment: Any (usually chaotic)
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

The haunt is the spirit of a person who died before completing some
vital task. A haunt inhabits an area within 60 feet of where its body died
and never leaves this area. (Note—a haunt in possession of a material
body can in fact leave its area and must do so in order to finish its task.)
It desires but one thing: its final rest. To accomplish this, it must possess
a living creature and finish the task that prevents it from achieving
everlasting slumber. A haunt only attacks humanoid creatures.
A haunt's natural form is that of a translucent image appearing much as
the person did in life, but it can alter its form so as to appear as a floating,
luminescent ball of light. In this form, it cannot use its dexterity damage
attack or its possession ability. It retains its ghostly form and can make an
ghostly touch attack that deals normal damage, but not dexterity damage.
A haunt remains in one form or the other until it chooses to assume a
new one (as a standard action). A change in form cannot be dispelled. A
haunt cannot change forms while using its malevolence attack (that is,
while possessing a host).

The touch of a haunt deals 1d3 points of dexterity damage to a living foe.
A creature reduced to 0 dexterity by a haunt is subjected to possession by
the spirit (similar to magic jar spell; saving throw permitted to negate the
possession). Dexterity returns to normal while the haunt is in possession
of a body, but drops back to 0 when the haunt leaves. Thereafter, dexterity
returns at the rate of one point per hour.
If the haunt possesses a victim, it attempts to complete its unfinished
task. If the haunt completes its task, it leaves the host and fades away
forever. If the host body is slain while the haunt is in possession of it, the
haunt becomes tied to that new area and can never leave. Its unfinished
task remains the same.

If a creature possessed by a haunt has an alignment opposite to that
of the haunt, it attempts to strangle the host using its own hands (i.e.,
the hands of the host body). Unless precautions are taken to restrain
the possessed victim's hands, they immediately reach for the throat and
begin strangling the haunt-possessed body. An opponent takes 1d4 points
of damage each round until its hands are forcibly restrained (opposed
strength checks to pry the host's hands loose), the haunt is ejected from
the body, or the victim dies.

In most cases, it's difficult to destroy a haunt through simple combat, as
the “destroyed” restores itself in 1d4 days. A haunt that would otherwise
be destroyed returns to its area with a successful saving throw. The only
way to get rid of a haunt for sure is to use dispel evil or allow it to finish
the task that holds it to the material world.

A haunt can be forcibly ejected from a host if hold person is cast on the
victim and the haunt fails its saving throw. A dispel evil spell instantly
ejects the creature from the host and deals 1d6 points of damage per
caster level to the haunt. A haunt slain in such a manner cannot rejuvenate
and is permanently destroyed.

As a ghostly, incorporeal creature, a haunt can only be hit by magic
weapons. A haunt's attacks ignore armor bonuses to Armor Class.

Possession Is 9/10ths of the Law
You emerge from the rain forest onto a sodden plateau inhabited by
giant lizards (dull, grazing herbivores). In the middle of the pleateau there
is a spear stuck in the ground, a brace of blue-gray feathers hanging from
the end. The plateau runs for another 300 feet before it ends in the black,
jagged cliffs of a chasm. The chasm is 100 feet across and spanned by a
rope bridge. The bridge leads into a cave in the higher cliff on the other
side of the chasm.
Approaching the spear will draw out a lawful haunt, the spirit of an
ancient chief who died while trying to rescue his kidnapped son from
a rival tribe. The chief's crushed bones are sunk into the plain beneath
the spear. The chief will appear out of nowhere, running towards the
adventurers, his incorporeal face tattooed in an awful grimace, intent
upon possessing one of the travelers to complete his mission.
Rescuing the child will be nearly impossible. The chief died 20 years
earlier, and his son is now a sub-chief in the tribe that kidnapped him and
unlikely to allow himself to be rescued by a complete stranger.
The chief's spear is a +1 magic weapon that, when cast through the air,
gives off a terrific war scream that forces those with 1 HD or less to make
a saving throw or flee in terror for 5 minutes.

Credit: The Haunt originally appeared in the First Edition module A2 Secret of
the Slavers Stockade (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Harold
Johnson and Tom Moldvay.

Helix Moth, Mature
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d4), sting (2d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Immune to charm, drone, poison
Move: 12/30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

Helix moths are 20-foot-long black insects with spiraling bands of red, green,
yellow, blue, purple, and white on their abdomens. Their underbelly is white.
Their large mandibles are gray, as are their legs. Three sets of translucent wings
protrude from the insect's body. A small black sword-like stinger protrudes from
the end of the moth's abdomen, capable of delivering a highly toxic poison. If the
moth beats its wings, the droning sound is audible up to 60 feet away and causes
confusion (as per the spell) in all who fail a save.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Helix Moth, Larva
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8 + acid)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Grab, acid
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Helix moth larvae are 10-foot-long maggot-like creatures with rubbery gray
flesh. Their cylindrical body is about 4 feet in diameter. Their entire body is
coated in a thick, slimy mucous. Larvae have no eyes but use their other senses
to detect prey. The mouth has two ridges along it that are formed of a hard, shelllike substance that function as teeth. Larvae lack most of the full-grown moth's
abilities, but their bite is still deadly and delivers a powerful regurgitated acid
(1d6 damage). Once the larva bites, it grips the creature with its mouth, dealing
automatic bite and acid damage until removed.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Crystal Moth
Thin purple spindles of sharp glass tower in the air in the Amethyst Jungle.
Spindly branches sprout from the glass trees. The wind warbles through the
crystal trees with a delicate sound of clinking glass. The amethyst trees grow
naturally and are incredibly sharp, dealing 1d4 points of damage to anyone
touching the trunks. A 100-foot-wide cavern splits the forest into two sides. One
side's glass is a deep violet, while across the canyon the glass is a lighter mauve.
The chasm drops nearly 150 feet to another glass forest at the bottom of the
canyon. A 30-foot-radius glass column stretches across the canyon. The giant
trunk is shaved flat across its upper surface to form a bridge across the chasm.
A helix moth lives in a cave mouth 50 feet down the cliff wall. The female
moth laid her eggs in the cavern a week ago. The moth is very territorial, and
rises to investigate any noise. Anyone cross the bridge is immediately attacked.
The drone caused by the moth's gigantic flapping wings sets up vibrations in
the crystals that have a 1 in 6 chance each round of shattering the crystal trees –
including the glass bridge.

Hell Moth
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Engulf, immolation, resistance to fire (90%)
Move: 6/15 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1700

The hell moth looks like a giant gray moth with spiraling bands of red
and black on its body. It has large, thin, reddish-hued wings. The hell
moth is thought to have come from another plane, though sages are not
quite sure of its exact origin. The hell moth attacks living creatures that
wander too close to its lair. It otherwise resembles a large moth with an
8-foot wingspan.

A hell moth can try to wrap a human-sized or smaller creature in its
body as a standard attack. If successful, it establishes a hold and bites
the engulfed victim with a +2 bonus on its attack roll. Attacks that hit an
engulfing hell moth deal half their damage to the monster and half to the
trapped victim. A hell moth that has engulfed an opponent can detonate
its body in a blast of hellish fire that deals 6d10 points of fire damage to
itself and to the engulfed opponent (no save). Remember to reduce the
damage dealt to the hell moth due to its fire resistance. A hell moth can
immolate itself once every 3 hours, providing it survives the immolation.
Creatures within 10 feet of the hell moth when it uses this ability must
succeed on a saving throw or take 1d8 points of fire damage as clothes
and combustibles ignite. The damage continues for another 1d4+4 rounds
after the hell moth uses this ability or until the fire is extinguished.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Hell Gate Pearl
On a low, green island located about 100 yards off the coast of a
pleasant harbor there is a large manor house that once belonged to the
court physician of the local king. The wooden bridge to the island has
been burned and three stone towers and a wall erected opposite the island
on the shore. These towers and wall are patrolled day and night by a
company of crossbowmen, each armed with three magical arrows.

The island measures about 1,200 feet in diameter. The shores are thick
with willows, their branches trailing in the waters of the bay. Beyond the
wall of willows there are pleasant gardens and goldfish ponds and the
blackened husk of a stone manor house. The central stone tower of the
manor still stands and is inhabited by a flock of 1d4+2 hell moths. The
tower once had three floors and an observatory on the roof, but the roof
and floors have been burned away.

At the center of the tower's floor there is a black pearl clutched in the
hand of a charred skeleton. The black pearl bathes the tower's interior in
darkness and attracts the hell moths the way a normal light attracts normal
moths. The pearl was a gift to the physician from a rival, a wise woman
of the hills who once enjoyed the patronage of the king. It has the ability
to cause darkness in a 60 foot radius but allows its holder to see in that
or any darkness. The holder of the pearl gains the ability to communicate
telepathically with the creatures of the night, though he is unable to block
their thoughts and might, if not possessed of a powerful will, succumb to
their predatory instincts. The pearl, if touched by a lawful person, opens a
swirling gate of black and red mists 30 feet overhead that draws in a flock
of hell moths, who continue to lurk around the pearl until it is returned
to its container, a black, metallic box stamped with the grimacing face of
Yama, the death god.

Herald of Tsathogga
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 14
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 10 tentacles (1d8) and 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Bellow, paralysis, swallow whole, regenerate, half
damage from blunt weapons
Move: 6/9 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

A herald of Tsathogga is a gigantic pale yellow-green frog with
oversized monstrous eyes. In place of its legs and forelimbs are many
long, writhing tentacles it uses to pull itself along the ground. The body
of the thing resembles that of a massive toad. These tentacles are covered
in tiny lancets that inject paralytic venom. A herald can bellow once ever
1d4 rounds in one of two ways: one sound is a trilling croak that deafens
all opponents within 30 feet (save avoids), while the other is a directed
sound that targets one foe within 100 feet for 4d6 points of damage (save
for half). If a herald of Tsathogga rolls a natural 20 on its bite attack,
it swallows its opponent whole for 3d6 points of damage per round. A
herald regenerates 5 hp per round.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley.

Creeping Swamp
A small dense swamp, roughly two miles in diameter, slowly moves
across the ground. The Creeping Swamp moves at walking pace and
moves like a plodding wave. The swamp bowls over stationary objects
such as trees, rocks and buildings. Larger structures are destroyed and
eventually pushed aside while things that stand in the swamp's way are
crushed beneath its weight. Simply walking onto the swamp is sufficient to
enter its perimeter. The swamp carries creatures or objects as if they were
standing in a motionless swamp. Trees and animals alike live perfectly
natural lives within the roving swamp as if it were normal wetlands. The
swamp remains is constantly humid no matter whatever environment
the swamp moves through. The Creeping Swamp contains common
swamp life such as giant mosquitoes, prehistoric alligators, gnarlwood,
undead treants and an occasional demon. Frogs and frog-like monsters
overpopulate the swamp. A clan of powerful tsar has even established a
temple to Tsathogga near the back edge of the Creeping Swamp.
The water gradually increases to a depth of four feet near the center. The
swampy ground extends into the earth about 10 feet deep at its heart and
tapers at the sides as it slides across the land. The swamp leaves a wide
swath of flattened and drenched lands as it passes. The swamp moves with
an uncanny intelligence and avoids rocky terrain, deserts, canyons and
large bodies of water. The Creeping Swamp remains stationary for years
at a time before beginning another journey to an unknown destination.
The Herald of Tsathogga controls the Creeping Swamp from a mud
pit at the heart of the swamp. Four clay golems resembling giant toads
surround the pit. A high priest of Tsathogga also attends to the sanctuary
and speaks for the demon lord. The pit contains plunder collected from
the swamp's victims and the settlements consumed by the swamp.

Hippocampus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d4) or tail slap (1d6) or butt (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: None
Move: 0/24 (swimming)
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A hippocampus is often called a merhorse or sea horse, for it is indeed a
half-horse/half-fish creature of the sea. The hindquarters of the animal are
that of a great fish. Its body is covered in fine scales in the fore parts and
large scales elsewhere. The hippocampus’ scales vary in color from ivory
to deep green, with shades of blue and silver. Aquatic races often tame
these animals, and they make fine steeds, for they are strong, swift, and
very intelligent. A hippocampus is about 8 feet long and weighs about 600
pounds. Hippocampuses speak the language of merfolk and tritons, and
about 10% speak common. Though they are unable to move on land, a
hippocampus can breathe air and survive out of the water for 15 minutes.

Training a Hippocampus A hippocampus requires training before it can bear a rider in combat.
To be trained, a hippocampus must have a friendly attitude toward the
trainer. Training a friendly hippocampus requires six weeks of work and
the assistance of an animal trainer. Riding a hippocampus requires an
exotic saddle. A hippocampus can fight while carrying a rider, but the
rider cannot also attack unless he or she succeeds on rolling 1d20 under
their dexterity score, with fighters subtracting their level from the roll.
Hippocampus eggs are worth 1,500 gp apiece on the open market, while
young are worth 2,500 gp each. Professional trainers (usually tritons)
charge 1,000 gp to rear or train a hippocampus.
A light load for a hippocampus is up to 300 pounds; a medium load,
301-600 pounds; and a heavy load, 601-900 pounds.

Credit: The Hippocampus originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Noble Steeds
On a mountainous island of tiny villages and terraced rice fields, there
rules a powerful daimyo, the son of a nobleman and a mermaid. The
daimyo rules not only the surface of the island, but also the seafloor
around the island to an extent of 5 miles. A tribe of 300 merfolk dwell
around the island, spending their time sunning themselves, singing and
playing pranks on fishermen.
Among them is a retinue of seven merfolk samurai in shimmering scale
coats and wielding barbed spears. On a green meadow in the midst of the
undersea mountains, a trio of samurai and their servants look after their
herd of nine hippocampuses. The hippocampuses are more loyal to their
daimyo than the merfolk (who are always slightly chaotic, despite their
best intentions), and the largest and most intelligent of the beasts belongs
to the daimyo himself.
In the midst of that meadow of seaweed there is a tall, stone idol in the
image of Kannon. The idol has a calming influence on the horses, and in
fact acts of violence within 100 feet of the idol are impossible without
making a saving throw. Should one perform a courtly dance for the idol,
it may (10% chance + 1% per point of dexterity) a single golden teardrop
might emerge from its right eye. This teardrop, collected and turned into
an amulet, allows one to turn/command sea creatures as a 1st level cleric
(+1 level if lawful, +1 level if their wisdom is 13+).

Hoar Fox
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Breath weapon, immunity to cold, double damage
from fire, surprise on roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Hoar foxes are silvery-gray foxes with sapphire colored eyes. They hunt
in packs and can often be found lairing near settled areas. Hoar foxes are
often hunted for their fur as it brings a handsome sum on the open market.
While attacking a hoar fox with fire seems like a sensible solution (given
their vulnerability to it), such an attack destroys its pelt and renders it
worthless. Three times per day, a hoar fox can expel a blast of frigid ice
in a 30-foot cone. A creature in the area takes 2d6 points of cold damage
(saving throw for half damage).

Credit: The Hoar Fox originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Graeme
Morris.

Trapped in the Trapper's Cabin
Traveling across the frigid taiga, the trees sparkling from the frost that
covers their branches and the snow clinging to your ankles, you come
across a cabin. The cabin appears to be in good repair, but it is covered
in frost and no smoke curls up from its chimney. Four days ago, a lone
trapper carried home a number of fur bearing critters, including a hoar
fox that, he later discovered, was not yet dead. When the creature awoke
in the cabin, it unleashed multiple cones of frost, icing the door shut and
covering much of the interior with frost. The trapper was killed, and for
the last three days has served as the hoar fox's only sustenance. It has
tried in vain to escape the cabin, but the sub-zero temperatures outside
have kept the ice from its own breath from melting.
Should adventurers enter the place, the will find the hoar fox hiding
in a corner behind a wooden chair. It is as likely to attack as it is to flee.
The floor in the cabin is covered in many patches of ice, making combat
tricky. Those who miss on an attack or attempt to move more than 3 feet
during a round must pass a saving throw or fall prone, suffering 1 point of
damage in the process. Besides the half-eaten body of the trapper (could
it rise as an undead due to its shocking death?) the cabin contains a store
of foodstuffs (5 weeks of normal rations, 2 weeks of iron rations), fresh
water in a large jug, the tools of the trapper's trade and animal pelts worth
1d6 x 20 gp.

Hoar Spirit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4 + cold) or 1 weapon (1d8 + cold)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: cone of cold (1/day), immune to cold, paralyze
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Hoar spirits are believed to be humanoids that freeze to death and are doomed
to haunt the icy wastes. A hoar spirit appears much as it did in life, though
its body is gaunt and rotting, and its clothes are tattered. Its skin is pale
gray with ice crystals randomly located on its form. Its hands end in wicked
claws with pale blue, nearly translucent nails. Its eyes are frozen solid and
show no signs of life. Any strike with by the creature's claws deals an extra
1d4 points of damage from the intense cold radiating off its body, and
a victim must save or be paralyzed for 1d4+1 rounds. A hoar spirit can unleash
a cone of cold once per day.

The Ice Maidens

The temperature in the Wailing Glacier's cavern is below freezing. The floor,
walls and ceiling of the 30-foot-long by 40-foot-wide chamber are covered in
a foot-thick layer of ice. A cold wind blows through the chamber.

Frozen in place are 16 humanoids of various sizes, shapes and races. PCs
examining the figures find:

• Five elves wearing heavy furs and sealskins. The furs are brittle to the
touch. The elves hunch forward as if pulling a heavy weight.

• An ogre wearing animal pelts. The creature appears to have sat down next to
a fire – and never gotten up again. It still holds a carved branch with
a spitted rainbow trout on it.

• Six humans wearing furs, with frostbitten features. Four appear rotted, with
bloody ice crystals caking their torsos. The two “intact” humans embrace,
their bodies frozen so completely to one another that no amount of pulling
separates them.

• Two dwarves engaged in a tug-of-war with one another's beards. The dwarves
each have a handful of beard in their hands. The beards are as frozen as their
bodies.  Their eyes are glassy and marble-like.

• An orc frozen while drawing his short sword. His feet are encased in heavy
blocks of ice that keep him upright.  Icicles hang from his protruding tusks.

• A seated satyr playing a small golden harp. The harp's strings are broken
and twisted, but also frozen.

Two of the female frozen undead humans are hoar spirits posing among their
victims. The pair hunt together, and bring their victims’ bodies back to this
ice cave to devour at their leisure. The frozen glacier keeps the victims
preserved and frozen.

One of the hoar spirits wears an iron crown set with six rubies (500 gp).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Hornet, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: bite (1d3) or sting (1d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Poison, pheromone
Move: 1/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Giant hornets are 9-foot- long insects with black bodies and white
markings on their thorax and abdomen. Giant hornets attack by biting
their foes, only relying on their stingers when threatened. During combat,
they release a pheromone that agitates all other giant hornets in the area,
making them more aggressive (+1 attack, damage).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Riders in the Sky
The Hornet Riders of Olathe raise giant insects to carry them into
battle. The kobolds fly in raiding groups of six. Each hornet wears a
small saddle. The kobolds carry small crossbows and short swords. The
kobolds demand tribute (all the gold PCs carry is a good start) and use
hand signals to direct the giant hornets to back up their demands. The
kobolds wear leather armor decorated with yellow-and-black stripes.
The Hornet Riders live in Olathe, a mountain village overrun by the foul
creatures. A cave on the edge of town is the giant hornets’ hive. The entire
nest contains more than 60 hornets, although not all are capable yet of
carrying riders. A small shack outside the cave entrance contains tack and
weapons for the 25 kobold riders who live in the village.
Thirty humans walk with their heads down through the dirty streets.
They are the only villagers still alive. They serve the kobolds to keep
from being killed.

Horsefly, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Blood drain
Move: 3/15 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Giant horseflies are 8-foot-long, black hairy flies. Their bodies are thick
and their multifaceted eyes are black and dark gold. Their wings are
translucent and their legs are long, bristly and jet black. Females have a
slightly longer mouth tube than males. A giant horsefly that successfully
bites an opponent latches on to drain the creature's blood for 1d4 points
of damage per round until dislodged.’

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

A Wing and a Prayer
Screams and pleas for help bellow from overhead. The shrieks come
from Ollie Nematoad, a halfling inventor. Ollie wove a large enclosed
basket and tethered it to a giant horsefly in the hopes of harnessing
overland flight without the use of magic. Unfortunately, Ollie forgot to
figure out a way to guide the horsefly once it was airborne. The panicstricken horsefly chaotically flees the shrieking Halfling, dragging Ollie
along behind it. The giant horsefly is starving and greedily attacks anyone
on the ground. After touching down, Ollie cannot stand and retches for
several minutes due to hours spinning in the basket beneath the buzzing
insect. Once slain, the giant horsefly releases pheromones that attract
more giant horseflies.

Hound of Ill Omen
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
The hound of ill omen (only one is thought to exist) is a legendary
monster that appears when a living creature offends his/her deity. The
hound appears as a shadowy, translucent wolf about 5 feet tall at the
shoulder. Only the creature that offended his deity can see the hound, and
only he is affected by the hound's attack. The hound cannot be attacked
or driven away by any known means.

The hound of ill omen unleashes a booming howl (audible only to its
intended target) that curses the target. This curse causes the next 1d10
wounds the target takes to automatically deal double damage.
Until the target suffers the requisite number of wounds, no form of
natural healing cures any damage the target takes. Likewise, any caster
attempting to cast a healing spell on cursed target must succeed on a
saving throw or the spell has no effect on the cursed creature.

The victim receives no save to avoid the howl's effects and it cannot
be removed by any means short of a god's magic, but if remove curse is
cast on the target within 10 minutes after the howl, the effects of the curse
are halved (i.e., only 1d5 wounds automatically confirm as critical hits).

Credit: The Hound of Ill Omen originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Mike
Roberts.

Howls of the Bloody Beast
While trouping across the moors, through the sodden ground and the
purple lichens that grow on the white, spiky stones that give the Fangmoor
its name, a band of adventurers might hear a mournful howl weaving its
way through the stones and across the moor. As the howl reverberates,
mists begin to gather on the ground. In the village or carriage inn on the
edge of the moor, the adventurers will probably have been warned about
the Bloody Beast, a ghostly hound that haunts the moor and presages the
death of any who look upon it. If they turn back now, they will be safe,
but if they press on there is a cumulative 1 in 6 chance per hour (i.e. 1 in 6
during the first hour, 2 in 6 the next, etc) that a hound of ill omen appears
on a rise, looking down on the unfortunate adventurers.

Huecuva
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Claws (1d4+1 plus disease)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Change self, disease, silver or +1 weapons to hit
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Huecuva are the undead spirits of good clerics who were unfaithful to their
god and turned to the path of evil before death. As punishment for their
transgression, their god condemned them to roam the earth as the one creature
all good-aligned clerics despise — undead. Huecuva resemble robed, worm-ridden
skeletons and are often mistaken for such creatures. Three times per day,
a huecuva can disguise their appearance with an illusion that makes them
appear to be a normal cleric.

A huecuva attacks relentlessly until either it or its opponent is dead.
During combat, if a lawful cleric attempts to turn a huecuva and fails, the
huecuva concentrates all attacks on that cleric, ignoring all other opponents
until the cleric or the huecuva is dead.

People struck in combat by the huecuva's claws must pass a saving throw or
come down with a fever. The fever incubates for 1d3 days before its symptoms
appear. Once the incubation period is over, the disease inflicts 1d3 points of
constitution and dexterity damage each day until the diseased victim passes
a saving throw at a -3 penalty.

Innocent Until Proven Guilty
The church of the village you just entered in search of healing has been
bricked up. The work is fairly fresh and crudely done, as though finished
in a hurry. Three days prior, the chief inquisitor of the church rode into
town on a palfrey and ordered the parish priestess and her acolytes taken
into custody. After a hasty trial in which evidence of involvement in the
slave trade was presented, the priestesses were cast into the great hearth
of the temple (the temple being dedicated to the hearth goddess). It was
a terrible shock for the people to see their beloved priestesses accused,
convicted and summarily slain (especially in so terrible a manner), but it
was an even more terrible shock to see them emerge from the flames as
smoldering skeletons and strangle the inquisitor.

The people fled and did their best to trap the huecuvas in the temple, but
they were unaware of the tunnels dug beneath the temple and accessibly
via a secret door. The huecuvas are now loose, and will begin to strike at
night through numerous secret passages, dragging their victims into the
tunnels and casting them into the slave pits to die of starvation or fever.
Hidden in the tunnels there are three treasure chests, each locked and
guarded by a poisoned needle. The chests are hidden in different places
- one buried in a slave pit, one behind a false wall next to the secret door
from the temple into the tunnels, and one buried near one of the exits. In
total, the chests hold 1d6 x 200 gp, 1d8 x 200 sp, a brass toe ring etched
with the name “Melinda” worth 25 gp, a tiny hematite idol of the Mouse
Lord worth 4 gp and a pearl worth 175 gp.

Credit: The Huecuva originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by
Underworld Oracle.

Huggermugger
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Confusion
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A huggermugger appears as a 3- to 4-foot-tall humanoid with short,
cropped, black hair, hidden beneath a black hat, pulled low so as to hide
its facial features. Its skin is pale and cold to the touch, regardless of
the actual temperature in the surrounding area. A huggermugger's normal
attire, in addition to its hat, is a robe of black or dark gray. Huggermuggers
do not speak, other than the incessant chattering and mumbling they seem
to constantly indulge in. If three or more huggermuggers surround an
opponent and begin chattering, it causes confusion in the creature (as per
the spell).

Capers at the Carnivale
The Carnivale of Plenty is a nonstop celebration lasting from early
morning to late night in the city of Listor. Revelers stagger from one party
to the next. Wine flows in abundance, and colorful outfits are expected.
Horse carts stand outside taverns where their drivers abandoned them.
Rose petals litter the roads.

A band of huggermuggers is living in the city and plans to abduct, rob, ransom
and kill (in no particular order) as many people as possible. They use the
carnival to hide their many schemes to get people alone. The Game Referee
could use any or all of the following encounters– or craft your own – to build
tension in the group before the huggermuggers make their move and finally
abduct someone:

• A huggermugger stands at the end of a dark alley, barely visible in the
darkness. It looks like a child torturing a cat and giggling crazily. If a PC
approaches, a group of six huggermuggers surround and charm the victim before
bustling him into an abandoned warehouse to disarm and rob. If a group enters
the alley, the huggermugger “child” runs off and vanishes.

• PCs see a dark shape shadowing them across the rooftops. If anyone climbs or
flies, they find a red velvet scarf tied around the neck of a child's doll
waiting for them.

• A sewer grate gives way beneath a PC, dropping him 15 feet into the muck if
he fails a save. A group of huggermuggers tries to surround and charm the
victim.

• An wooden outhouse sits behind a tavern. Any PC who steps inside hears
a strange “murmuring” as four huggermuggers surround the shack and try to
charm the person inside. If they fail, they lock the door and stab through
each wall.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Inphidian, Cobra-Back
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 snake hand bites (1d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Poison, spit poison
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Somewhere in humanities lost aeons a race of malformed serpentine humanoids rose, now known as inphidians.
While the truth of their origins has been long forgotten, most sages subscribe to one of two theories. The first states
the creatures are the failed results of horrific experiments performed by the dark and nameless sorcerers of an ancient
snake-cult in their attempts to ensorcel their followers. The second theory contends the inphidians were once a cult
of snake-worshippers cursed by an ancient snake-god for some transgression against the ethos. Whatever the truth, it
appears as of late that the inphidians have evolved into true race, beyond the machinations of arcane experiments or
curses. While there exist several known species, recent reports describe encounters with yet unidentified inphidians
and others are sure to surface as encounters with the race grow more frequent.
Inphidians, regardless of their subspecies, have viper heads in place
of their hands. The creatures use these in combat to deliver a powerful
bite that injects the victim with poison. Some inphidians, particularly the
craftsmen, wear special gloves called inphidian gauntlets that let them use
their hands like any other humanoid with five digits.

Cobra-backs appear as roughly humanoid creatures just over 6 feet tall
with a large flap of skin (known as the hood) that runs the length of their
neck/spine. Cobra-backs are blue-green scaled like other inphidians, their
eyes are crimson, and their forked tongue is gray. Like their brethren,
their hands are actually viper heads complete with sharpened fangs that
secrete a virulent poison (3d4 points of damage, save for half). When
threatened or enraged, the hood of the cobra-back fans open just like that
of a true cobra. A cobra-back can spit a line of poison 20 feet from its
mouth every 1d4 rounds (2d6 points of damage, save for half).

New Item: Inphidian Gauntlets Inphidian gauntlets are nonmagical leather or metal gauntlets
that provide a creature (normally an inphidian) without humanoid
hands a set of fully functional hands. When wearing these
gauntlets, the creature can manipulate items normally considered
unusable (because the creature lacks hands).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Slave Masters
Inside the city of Uroborus, a city being built in the Seething Jungle by
the inphidians to honor their snake god Lachesiss, slaves are little more
than cattle to be whipped and killed at the whim of the snake men.
A group of 15 captives toil in the jungle humidity, working on their bare
and bleeding knees to place sparkling quartz and mica into a 300-footwide brick plaza. They are halfway done, but already the rearing head of
a cobra can be discerned in the stonework.
A pair of female cobra-back inphidian taskmasters named Naja and Mia
stand over the slaves, whipping them with cat-o-nine-tails made from the
leathery bodies of dead serpents. The fangs remaining in the snake heads
make the slaves jump and scream each time the whips strike flesh.

Inphidian, Common
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 snake-hand bites (1d4 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Blinding spray, poison
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Somewhere in humanities lost aeons a race of malformed serpentine humanoids rose, now known as inphidians.
While the truth of their origins has been long forgotten, most sages subscribe to one of two theories. The first states
the creatures are the failed results of horrific experiments performed by the dark and nameless sorcerers of an ancient
snake-cult in their attempts to ensorcel their followers. The second theory contends the inphidians were once a cult
of snake-worshippers cursed by an ancient snake-god for some transgression against the ethos. Whatever the truth, it
appears as of late that the inphidians have evolved into true race, beyond the machinations of arcane experiments or
curses. While there exist several known species, recent reports describe encounters with yet unidentified inphidians
and others are sure to surface as encounters with the race grow more frequent.
Inphidians, regardless of their subspecies, have viper heads in place
of their hands. The creatures use these in combat to deliver a powerful
bite that injects the victim with poison. Some inphidians, particularly the
craftsmen, wear special gloves called inphidian gauntlets that let them use
their hands like any other humanoid with five digits.

A common inphidian appears as a humanoid standing about 6 feet tall.
Its skin is covered with blue-green scales and its head is almost snake-like
in appearance. It has no hair on its head or body. The most unusual feature
of an inphidian is its hands; for where they should be, they are not. Each
hand has been replaced with the head of a viper with scales of the same
blue-green color as the other parts of the inphidian. Common inphidians
make up the bulk of the population in inphidian communities. They are
the laborers, craftsmen, workers, citizens, guards, and militia.
Once every 1d4 rounds, a common inphidian can spew forth a line
of milky-white liquid that causes blindness (as the blindness spell) for
6 rounds to any creature struck. A successful saving throw avoids the
spray. The spray has a range of 20 feet. The snake hands of the common
inphidian deliver a debilitating poison with a successful bite from its
snake-hands. The poison weakens the bitten victim, imposing a -2 penalty
to hit and damage in melee combat.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Snakes in the Savanna
On a humid savanna you see a large outcropping of stone. The
outcropping is composed of several large, flat stones set at different angles
to one another and propped up on rounded stones that are carved to look
like the top of human heads, their eyes peeking over the grasses of the
savanna. A number of holes riddle the outcropping and are home to a tribe
of 1d5 x10 degenerate serpent people called inphidians. The inphidians
are led by a malevolent trio of females, all born from the same clutch and
having golden markings on their skin and the ability to cast spells as 5th
level clerics. The will of the clerics is carried out by a sisterhood of five
warriors.

During the day, the inphidians can be seen sunning themselves on the
rocks or encountered within 3 miles of their home hunting for small
mammals. The burrow of the priestesses contains a number of terracotta
jars - bulbous and etched with diamond patterns - containing pickled
roots and animal organs. Feathered cloaks hang on hooks embedded in
the walls but are only worn on ceremonial occaisions. The sisters
also have an ivory scroll case in their possession. The case
contains a parchment scroll depicting the savanna (one can make
out the outcropping and a few other landmarks). A dotted line
shows the path of a treasure caravan that a wicked mage has
hired the inphidians to attack, for it is carrying a princess royal
accompanied only by a bodyguard on her way to wed a bandit king
of the plains.

The inphidian's treasure might consist of 4,500 gp (ancient, triangular
coinage, with about one of every 100 coins coated with a deadly contact
poison), 3,400 sp and a leather sack containing a tourmaline worth 100
gp, a banded agate worth 175 gp and a tiger's eye worth 100 gp.

Inphidian, Dancer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 snake hand bites (1d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Poison, entrancing dance
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Somewhere in humanities lost aeons a race of malformed serpentine humanoids rose, now known as inphidians.
While the truth of their origins has been long forgotten, most sages subscribe to one of two theories. The first states
the creatures are the failed results of horrific experiments performed by the dark and nameless sorcerers of an ancient
snake-cult in their attempts to ensorcel their followers. The second theory contends the inphidians were once a cult
of snake-worshippers cursed by an ancient snake-god for some transgression against the ethos. Whatever the truth, it
appears as of late that the inphidians have evolved into true race, beyond the machinations of arcane experiments or
curses. While there exist several known species, recent reports describe encounters with yet unidentified inphidians
and others are sure to surface as encounters with the race grow more frequent.
Inphidians, regardless of their subspecies, have viper heads in place
of their hands. The creatures use these in combat to deliver a powerful
bite that injects the victim with poison. Some inphidians, particularly the
craftsmen, wear special gloves called inphidian gauntlets that let them use
their hands like any other humanoid with five digits.

Most dancer/charmer inphidians appear as shapely female humanoids;
lithe and elegant in their movements. A charmer's forked tongue is gray
and their eyes are crimson. Like other inphidians their body is covered in
blue-green scales and where their hands should be, a viper head sprouts
from each of its arms. Each viper head is of the same blue-green color and
scaled like the rest of the charmer's body. The snake head hands strike
with a weak poison (1d4 points of damage), so the inphidian usually
relies on its entrancing dance to charm those seeing it (as per a charm
person spell).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Snake Charmers
A series of 10-foot-deep pits is dug into the earth inside the walls of
Uroborus, and each is filled with 30 or so slaves. The pits are 60 feet
across, and smell of sweat and feces. Ten-foot-tall metal poles are spaced
every 15 feet around the edges of the pits. Slinking around the poles are
10 dancer/charmer inphidians who keep the slaves in line and charmed
until they are needed to hoist the blocks and lay the bricks in the city's
construction.

The female snake dancers move alluringly between the poles, twisting
their bodies around the metal as they dance. Their bodies are covered in
silky veils that leave little to the imagination, and charm the minds of all
who see them. Rope ladders are lowered into the pit to let the charmed
slaves out to work in the city. The inphidians attempt to charm PCs who
get too close to the pit, and push them over the edge into the slave mob.
The dancer/charmer inphidians shriek and flee if attacked.

Inphidian, Night Adder
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 snake hand bites (1d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Poison, spells
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Somewhere in humanities lost aeons a race of malformed serpentine humanoids rose, now known as inphidians.
While the truth of their origins has been long forgotten, most sages subscribe to one of two theories. The first states
the creatures are the failed results of horrific experiments performed by the dark and nameless sorcerers of an ancient
snake-cult in their attempts to ensorcel their followers. The second theory contends the inphidians were once a cult
of snake-worshippers cursed by an ancient snake-god for some transgression against the ethos. Whatever the truth, it
appears as of late that the inphidians have evolved into true race, beyond the machinations of arcane experiments or
curses. While there exist several known species, recent reports describe encounters with yet unidentified inphidians
and others are sure to surface as encounters with the race grow more frequent.
Inphidians, regardless of their subspecies, have viper heads in place
of their hands. The creatures use these in combat to deliver a powerful
bite that injects the victim with poison. Some inphidians, particularly the
craftsmen, wear special gloves called inphidian gauntlets that let them use
their hands like any other humanoid with five digits.

Usually dressed in black robes, an inphidian night adder has black
scales covering its entire body. Its head is serpentine and its arms end in
snake-like hands resembling a black mamba. A night adder stands 6-1/2
feet tall and weighs 190 pounds. The snake hands of a night adder deliver
a deadly poison. About 40% of night adder inphidians can cast spells as
a 7th-level Cleric.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Serpent Rises
In the sandy ruins of a forgotten temple dwells the clandestine cult of
Lachesiss. Only curling columns and sand-covered foundations remain
of this ancient space. The crypts below now serve as a vile temple.
Poisonous snakes and scorpions coalesce into a moving carpet within
the ruins. The desecrated remains of the mummies of Osiris’ faithful lie
scattered throughout the sand.
The inphidian cult has far-reaching tendrils that invade settlements
throughout the lands. The cult mostly consists of human assassins and
priests. Guarding the entrance to the temple's depths at all times are
1d4+1 inphidian rattlers from the snake city of Uroborus. This sect is led
by a night adder inphidian who can cast an additional four spells: sticks
to snakes, charm monster, polymorph self and monster summoning II.
The cultists melted all the gold looted from the crypts into a huge jewelencrusted cobra. The statue weighs 300 pounds. The inphidians hope
to create a portal from this desolate spot to Uroborus – in the hope of
constructing a second snake city here.

Inphidian, Rattler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 snake hand bites (1d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Death rattle, paralytic poison
Move: 9/6/6 (climb/swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Somewhere in humanities lost aeons a race of malformed serpentine humanoids rose, now known as inphidians.
While the truth of their origins has been long forgotten, most sages subscribe to one of two theories. The first states
the creatures are the failed results of horrific experiments performed by the dark and nameless sorcerers of an ancient
snake-cult in their attempts to ensorcel their followers. The second theory contends the inphidians were once a cult
of snake-worshippers cursed by an ancient snake-god for some transgression against the ethos. Whatever the truth, it
appears as of late that the inphidians have evolved into true race, beyond the machinations of arcane experiments or
curses. While there exist several known species, recent reports describe encounters with yet unidentified inphidians
and others are sure to surface as encounters with the race grow more frequent.
Inphidians, regardless of their subspecies, have viper heads in place
of their hands. The creatures use these in combat to deliver a powerful
bite that injects the victim with poison. Some inphidians, particularly the
craftsmen, wear special gloves called inphidian gauntlets that let them use
their hands like any other humanoid with five digits.

A rattler inphidian is 6 feet tall and about 8 feet long, with a viper head
and the lower torso of a giant rattlesnake. Colors vary, but most are
brown, black, or dark gray with bands and diamond-shaped patterns.
Like all inphidians, its hands are viper heads. Once every 1d4 rounds,
a rattler inphidian can unleash a death rattle that does 2d6 points of
damage to all creatures in a 40-foot-radius (save for half). The snake
hand bite of a rattler inphidian delivers a paralytic poison (2d8 points of
damage, paralysis, save resists).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Serpentine Pillar
Beneath the Temple of Entwined Serpents within the inphidian city
of Uroborus lie the crypts of a desecrated temple. Standing within this
unhallowed space is the Serpentine Pillar. Inphidian cultists invaded
and defiled the temple, subverting it to their wicked campaign before
they began building their glorious city overtop it. The Serpentine Pillar
represents the centerpiece of the new snake temple. This 20-foottall column of living, entwined snakes harnesses the dark powers of
Lachesiss, the dark god of snakes. Its baleful aura slowly turns living
beings into snake-like abominations.
Creatures within 10 feet of the pillar must make a successful save each
round or gain serpentine characteristic such as a forked tongue, scaled
skin, slit eyes or venomous fangs. The Game Referee can further expand
the inflictions, if needed. After an hour of exposure, most creatures
painfully transform into an inphidian. Currently, the room holds four
inphidian rattlers that slither from the pillar. Only strong magic can
remove the permanent transformations caused by the Serpentine Pillar.

Iron Cobra
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1+1
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Bite (1d4 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Find target, poison, magic resistance 10%
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

The iron cobra is a construct that resembles a small, 3-foot long cobra.
Its eyes give it an evil, determined and almost intelligent look. The iron
cobra is most often used to guard a treasure or to act as a bodyguard to
its creator, though on some occasions it can be ordered to track down and
slay any creature who is within 1 mile and whose name is known by the
creator.

When ordered to find a creature within 1 mile, an iron cobra does so
unerringly, as though guided by magic. The being giving the order must
have seen (or must have an item belonging to) the creature to be found.
The bite of an iron cobra is poisonous, but being a construct, it does not
produce its poison. The creator must fill the iron cobra's poison sacs. The
sacs can be filled with any poison type of poison, but the poison is usually
fatal. The iron cobra can inject its poison three times before its sacs are
emptied. It takes 5 rounds to refill the poison sacs.

Construction An iron cobra's body is constructed from 100 pounds of iron costing at
least 1,000 gp. Assembling the body requires the help of an armorer and
a 10th level cleric.

Credit: The Iron Cobra originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Philip
Masters.

Apples and Serpents
In a cavernous vault of mottled limestone there is a small shrine
dedicated to a forgotten goddess. The ceiling of the cavern drips with a
mild acid from the stalagtites on the ceiling. The shrine is carved into the
floor of the cavern. It consists of a cubical chamber (20 feet x 20 feet x
20 feet) with 5-ft walls surrounded by a 5-foot wide trench. The shrine
has a stone door that swings easily, as though its hinges are kept oiled.
Three walls of the shrine are covered in the preserved skins of reptilian
humanoids, their eyes replaced with spherical tiger eye gemstones (worth
10 gp each, 12 in all). The fourth wall is taken up by an idol depicting a
white skinned woman, plump and attractive, entwined with four large,
green-skinned serpents with garnets for eyes (eight garnets worth 50 gp
each). Wooden bowls filled with mealy apples are placed in front of the
idol and a chandelier of tallow candles hangs from the ceiling, casting
long, leering shadows in the otherwise lightless shrine.
Attempts to steal the gemstones draw out the shrine guardians, four iron
cobras. The cobras will emerge from the mouths of the serpents in the
idol, surprising anyone involved in prying out the garnet eyes. The iron
cobras will not leave the shrine, nor will they allow the bodies of tomb
robbers to be retrieved. Once every three days 1d3+3 inphidian shrine
keepers visit the shrine to replace the apples, refill the iron cobras with
poison (they summon them with bull roarers) and take away dead tomb
robbers.

Jack-O-Lantern
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  3 strikes (1d4) or fire seed (see below) or pitchfork
(1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Fire seeds
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A jack-o-lantern is an animated plant creature brought to life by
a combination of druidic magic and fey sprits. It looks like a roughly
humanoid shaped tangle of vines and leaves with a large pumpkin for its
head. The pumpkin-head bears a leering face that appears to have been
carved there, and glows from within with an eldritch fire. The nature of
the face generally reflects the alignment of the animating spirit. Once per
day, the monster can spit from its mouth up to four exploding pumpkin
seeds. It can spit the seeds up to 100 feet and deals a total of 8d8 points
of damage divided up between the seeds. The seeds explode in a 10 foot
radius and those in the area may attempt a saving throw to halve the
damage.

Creating a Jack-O-Lantern To create a jack-o-lantern, the caster must be a druid of at least 11th
level. Creating a jack-o-lantern involves placing a single pumpkin seed
into the mouth of a corpse and burying it in an open field. The body
must be that of a human or demi-human of at least 6th level or Hit Dice;
the jack-o-lantern has the same HD and alignment as the humanoid did
in life. Once the body is buried, the creator must cast plant growth and
produce fire, in that order.

The pumpkin plant that grows from it must be carefully nurtured and
tended. Several pumpkins will grow on the vine, one of which will contain
the essence of the nature spirit that will eventually animate the plant. The
creator must commune with nature to determine which pumpkin holds
the essence-all others must be picked off the vine and discarded. By
harvest time, if the creator chose the right pumpkin, the jack-o-lantern
will animate and seek out is creator for instructions.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Melon Terraces
In the rocky highlands inland from the warm jungle coast the farms
consist of narrow, rocky terraces planted with rice, melons and gourds.
Above these garden terraces are small hovels made from volcanic rocks
and palm fronds. Each of these villages has a wise woman or wise man
who oversees what administrative needs the village has and coordinates
the paying of tribute to the satrap on the coast. Most of these wise people
are druids of 1st to 3rd level. All of the wise men pay homage to an 11th
level archdruid who visits these villages on a set circuit. The archdruid
travels on a friendly elephant and has in his train a court of lesser druids,
ritual dancers and drummers, sacred smiths and brewers and an honor
guard of spearmen. In each village, the archdruid has stationed a jack-olantern to defend the fields, forming them from the bodies of wise people
who have died.
The villages possess no treasure beyond their wooden idols, instruments
and farming tools.

Jaculi
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Surprise on roll of 1-5 on 1d6
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Jaculi are serpents with long, muscular bodies and a squat, flat heads.
A mane-like ridge of sharpened bones surrounds its head. Jaculi average
8 feet long, but can grow to a length of 12 feet. Their natural coloration
is a deep green fading to a dark brown near the tail and light gray on
their underbellies.. Jaculi lie in wait for opponents, preferring places high
above the ground where they can leap on their prey and gain surprise.

Credit: The Jaculi originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/ Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Philip
Masters.

Ring Toss
Along the jungle coast there is a long stretch of chalk cliffs. Upon these
cliffs one can find hundreds of white-naped parrots. The parrots are favored
for their relative intelligence as pets and familiars and for their livers, the
bile of which is useful in a number of alchemical operations. Embedded
in the cliffs is a bronze sculpture 15 feet tall that depicts a winged goddess
with four heads on long, serpentine necks. The locals believe they can
summon good fortune for themselves by tossing garlands of flowers on
those heads from the top of the cliffs. This operation, of dubious value
anyways, is made more difficult by the swarm of 1d8+5 jaculi that occupy
the fig trees that line the top of the cliffs. The bronze statue is actually a
touchstone that transports people into the Elemental Plane of Air when
touched under a full moon. This is a possible explanation for why those
bits of earth that float in that plane are often colonized by jungle flowers.

Marsh Jelly
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 4 tentacles (1d6 + poison)
Special: Death throws, disorienting glow, poison
Move: 4/18 (flying)
Saving Throw: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A marsh jelly looks like a hovering, flying jellyfish with a translucent
sickly green body and four long dangling grayish-pink tentacles. When
slain, a marsh jelly explodes in a blast of acid that deals 2d4 points of acid
damage to anything within 10 feet. A successful save reduces the damage
by half. When a marsh jelly first takes damage, its body begins pulsating
and flashing rapidly, emitting an eerie greenish glow. Creatures viewing
a pulsating marsh jelly are disoriented (–1 to-hit penalty) for 1d4 rounds.
Opponents hit by a marsh jelly's poison tentacles must make a saving
throw or be paralyzed for 1d4 round.

Up Through the Ground Came a Bubblin’ Ooze
The swamp in this area is stagnant and lifeless. Once-luscious green
moss draped from the trees hangs in brittle clumps. An oily skin covers
the water's surface. Methane bubbles assault the senses as they release
their putrid treasures. The bark at the base of the trees is dissolved from
the swamp gases. The water erupts in great bursting boils that splash
everything with rotten muck. A glowing bubble rises out of the brackish
water, with long tendrils writhing below the radiance. A marsh jelly waits
in this area for prey. The jelly eats everything in the area before moving
on to more abundant hunting grounds. More jellies can be adding to
increase the Challenge Level. The jellies could also hide in the trees and
drop down on PCs or appear as a peculiar green glow in the thick mists
that occasionally blanket the swamp.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Marsh Jelly, Demonic (Progeny of Jubilex)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 4 tentacles (1d8 + acid plus poison)
Special: 20% spell resistance, immune to poison and acid,
death throws, disorienting glow, telepathy 120 ft., poison
Move: 4/18 (flying)
Saving Throw: 3
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

A demonic marsh jelly looks like a larger, more sinister marsh jelly.
These intelligent minions carry out the will of their slime lord. When slain,
a demonic marsh jelly explodes in a blast of acid that deals 3d6 points of
acid damage to anything within 10 feet. A successful save reduces the
damage by half. When a demonic marsh jelly first takes damage, its body
pulsates and flashes rapidly, emitting an eerie greenish glow. Creatures
viewing this pulsating glow are disoriented (–2 on attack rolls) for 2d4
rounds. Opponents hit by a demonic marsh jelly's poison tentacles must
save or be paralyzed for 1d4 round.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Thus the Lord of Slime Smites Thee
A babbling vagrant makes his way through the crowded street. His skin
oozes with oil and filth. Snot streams from his nose and mucus collects
in his dirty beard. Commoners hold their noses in disgust and cover their
mouths as he passes. As the crowd disperses from the beggar, he raises
his arms to the sky and proclaims “Juhl-da-poo! For thee has transgressed
against the gory god of goo and gunk. Jook-a-spulck! Prepare to meet thy
doom of dung and drudge thee infidels of glop! Haaack-sploomp-plaaa!
Behold the strife of sludge!”

As the vagrant speaks the last words, sewage pours forth from all nearby
culverts, drains and manholes. The ground beneath him bubbles in a disgusting
morass. The vagrant falls to his knees, weeping with delight as the sludge
engulfs him. A massive glowing dome emerges from the mire around the man, and
long tendrils thrash about looking for victims.

Peligos was sent by the demon lord of slime to enact revenge upon PCs for the
extinction of his beloved ooze followers.  Whether the PCs are guilty or not
makes little difference to Peligos.

Jelly, Mustard
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Slam (2d4 plus 1d4 acid)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Acid, constriction, poison aura, +1 or better weapon to hit, divide, energy absorption, resistance to cold (50%), magic resistance (15%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

Mustard jelly appears to be a yellowish-brown form of the ochre jelly
and is thought to be a distant relative of said creature. However, the
mustard jelly is far more dangerous than its supposed relative because it
is intelligent. The mustard jelly gives off a faint odor of mustard plants to
a range of 20 feet. The mustard jelly exudes an aura in a 10-foot radius
centered on it that slows (as the slow spell) any creature in the area as long
as it remains in the area and for 1d4 rounds afterward. A new save must be
made each round a creature is within 10 feet of the mustard jelly.
A mustard jelly attacks by forming a pseudopod from its body and either
slashing or enveloping its foes. A creature hit by a pseudopod must pass
a saving throw or be constricted for automatic pseudopod damage each
round.

A mustard jelly can split itself into two identical jellies, each with half
of the original's current hp (round down). A jelly with 10 hp
or less cannot divide itself. When divided, each jelly moves faster than
the original (base speed 15 feet per round).
A mustard jelly is immune to electrical effects and magic missiles. If
targeted by an electricity effect (including area effects) or a magic missile
spell, the mustard jelly gains temporary hp equal to the amount of
damage it would have otherwise sustained. These temporary hp
last for 1 hour.

Credit: The Mustard Jelly originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Mustard Apocalypse
Walking across the marshlands, you come across the remains of a vast
canal city. All that remains, unfortunately, are the canals - not a single
building or foundation yet remains of the city, nor a brick of fallen
masonry or a scrap of wood. It is as if the entire city was swept away into
the ether in a single, terrible moment.

What does remain are the subterranean, flooded tunnels that once acted
as a sewage system for the city and permitted the movement of goods
into cellars. These tunnels harbor a number of alcoves and secret rooms
and are inhabited by a race of troglodytic humans - scrawny and small
of stature, with coarse black hair, jaundiced skin and pink eyes. These
people hide in their secret chambers, hoarding what treasures remained
from the ancient city and stockpiling what food they can glean from the
marsh - edible fungi, fish, crawdads, beetles, etc.
All of these folk live in terrible fear of the “devil”, a large mustard
jelly that dwells in the abandoned canals, hunting the remnants of the
ancient city. The jelly primarily dwells in a flooded wine cellar. What
casks remain intact are now filled with vinegar, though a secret panel
in one wall contains 1d4 x 1,000 sp, 1d6 x 1,000 gp, 1d6 x 100 pp and
a malachite dagger used in dark rituals (it is stained with blood) worth
100 gp.

Jelly, Stun
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Slam (1d6 plus 1d6 acid plus paralysis)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Acid, engulf, paralysis, camouflage, immunity to electricity, surprise on a roll of 1-3 on 1d6 Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Stunjellies are distant relatives of the dungeon-dwelling gelatinous
cube. It appears as a section of ordinary wall and covers an area of at least
10 square feet. A stunjelly is 2-1/2 to 5 feet thick. A stunjelly is gray in
color and slightly translucent. It gives off a mild vinegar odor that can be
detected at a range of 5 feet.

When a target moves within 5 feet of a stunjelly, it attacks with its slam
attack. A stunjelly's acid does not harm metal or stone. Creatures hit by
a stunjelly must pass a saving throw or be paralyzed for 3d6 rounds.
Stunjellies automatically engulf paralyzed creatures, who then suffer
automatic acid damage and paralysis each round. Attacks that hit an
engulfing stunjelly deal half their damage to the monster and half to the
trapped victim.

Stunjellies only surprise dwarves on a roll of 1-2 on 1d6.

Credit: The Stunjelly originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Neville
White.

Well Guard
A set of spiral stairs leads down into the center of a well-crafted stone
vault. The stairs are encased in steel bars with a narrow gate at the bottom.
The vault is 30 feet long and wide and 20 feet tall.
The vault is a trophy room (perhaps the owner is alive, perhaps not Referee's choice) holding such treasures as a stuffed great white shark
hanging from the ceiling by chains (a skeletal fighting man in +1 plate
mail is still encased in its stomach), a wax figure of a damsel in silk robes
with a tall, pointed hat and veil combination (the hat and veil act as a ring
of protection +1 when worn by a male, but gives off no magical aura), a
sphere of thick glass filled with the stuff of the Abyss, including a school
of transparent demonic fish and a night-black staff. The sphere will
transport the viewers to a beautiful garden glade of fragrant roses, pear
trees and two salt statues of young lovers locked in a kiss if the viewers
hold their breath, close their eyes and ease into the sphere fingers first.
The trophy room would be a mere gallery of the bizarre if not for the
stunjelly lurking within the vault. The stunjelly lurks on the wall near the
wax dummy.

Jelly, Whip
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 4 whip tendrils (1d4 + 1d4 acid)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Acid
Move: 8
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A whip jelly looks like a bluish-gray quivering pile of goo
with four long slimy tendrils jutting from its form. A whip
jelly, like most oozes, is a mindless hunter that spends its
time prowling the subterranean world for food. A whip jelly
secretes a deadly acid that quickly dissolves organic matter
but does not harm metal or stone. Any melee hit deals
acid damage. Non-metal armor or clothing dissolves and
becomes useless immediately unless.

Whipped
A knight in weathered plate mail armor stands where
the hall widens to a 15-foot circular. The knight's visor
is down, and he stands unmoving, bent slightly forward
at the waist. His chest plate hangs loose and his entire
body is covered in dust and translucent goo. He holds a
rusted long sword in his gauntlet, but the tip of the blade
is dug into the dirt of the cavern's floor. At the knight's
feet lie various metal helms, weapons and bits of armor.
A grime-coated +1 ring of protection can be found among
the various cast-off items. A deep voice speaks from the
knight if PCs approach within 15 feet: “Halt and identify
yourselves!” The same voice speaks again if PCs defy
the warning and come within five feet: “Drop your
weapons or face my wrath.”
The knight is a clockwork automaton a magic-user
crafted from gears and pulleys, a poor-man's iron golem
that barely functioned. The metal man marched with a stiff
gait, swung its blade indiscriminately at anyone it encountered, and in
general posed little threat to man or beast. The metal knight moved with a
constant clicking and whirring of gears, and rubber and cloth bands inside
the construct gave it life. Right now, the only thing still working on the
knight is a magic mouth cast into the knight's helm to issue warnings to
intruders.
The knight halted in place forever years ago when a whip jelly wormed
its way into the knight's dented chest cavity. The jelly dissolved the bands
that propelled the metal knight, causing the automaton to slump but not
fall. The jelly lives inside the knight's hollow chest cavity, venturing out
occasionally to find food. The metal objects at the knight's feet are the
remains of past meals. The goo covering the knight is an acid secreted
by the whip jelly that dissolves flesh and other organic matter, but leaves
metal unscathed.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Jellyfish, Monstrous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  Tentacles (1d6 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Poison, transparent (surprise on roll of 1-2 on 1d6)
Move: 0/6 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

The monstrous jellyfish's body is a translucent pink, blue, or purple
hollow form resembling an inverted umbrella of sorts. A giant jellyfish's
body averages 8 feet or more in diameter, while its tentacles (trailing
beneath it underwater) can reach lengths of around 50 feet or greater.
Special muscles on the underside of the jellyfish's body push water out
of it, allowing the creature to swim through propulsion. Jellyfish eat
anything that contacts their tentacles — usually crustaceans, fish, algae,
plankton and the occaissional water breathing adventurer.
A monstrous jellyfish's tentacles are highly poisonous, delivering a
paralyzing poison when contacted or contacting a foe. The victim of the
poison suffers 1d4 points of stinging damage and must pass a saving
throw or be paralyzed for 1d6 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene

Blue Lagoon Resort
A fortified palace of white stone and elegant onion domes stands near
a jungle lagoon. The palace is owned by the satrap of the jungle coast, a
comely, artistic man more concerned with his poetry than the governance
of his realm. Discipline and administraiton is handled by his wife, a tall,
stately woman with deep, bronze skin, glossy black hair and a blood-red
temper.
The palace is surrounded by gardens of orchids, ferns and fruit trees and
a series of deep, salt water ponds connected to the lagoon and inhabited
by a swarm of 1d12+10 monstrous jellyfish, their translucent pink and
purple bodies beautiful in the crystal clear waters of the ponds. Entrance
to the ponds via the lagoon is blocked by a bronze grate that can be lifted
with a winch in a small, marble cupola nearby.
The palace grounds are guarded by a hobgoblin slave soldiers,
klibanophoroi wearing heavy scale armor and carrying shields, long
spears and curved short swords. Those who patrol the grounds do so
mounted on striped jungle horses.
The satrap is a most generous and pleasant man, sitting on his portico
in his wicker throne upon the kamadan rugs, dining on peacock eggs
and jellied cobra while dwarven eunuchs in bulbous turbans and red
loincloths fan him with palm fronds. His wife will be found roaming the
palace, barking orders at her clarks and servants, raising a furor wherever
she goes. Guests who have made themselves a bother might be tossed in
the pools with the jellyfish.
The palace treasury contains 2d12 x 100 sp and 1d6 x 1,000 gp. The
satrap wears a large moonstone worth 200 gp on his turban.

Jupiter Bloodsucker (Vampire Plant)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  6 vine-leaves (1d6 plus blood drain)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Blood drain, smother, double damage from fire
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

The jupiter bloodsucker, or vampire plant, is a man-sized, seemingly
ordinary plant that looks like a tangle of leaves and roots topped by four
large, dark green, serrated leaves with red veins. A creature looking
closely at the roots may notice that the stems are transparent and that
blood seems to course through them. On the bottom of each leaf are many
small, sharp thorns. These are used to attach to a victim and drain its
blood.
A jupiter bloodsucker deals 1 point of constitution damage per round
per vine-leaf attached to a foe. If reduced to zero points of constitution,
the victim has been completely drained of blood and dies. Constitution
points lost to a jupiter bloodsucker heal at the rate of 1 per hour. Prying a
leaf loose requires a successful open doors check.
A victim struck by more than one vine-leaf in a round must make a
saving throw to avoid being smothered by them. For every vine-leaf
beyond the first, the victim suffers a -1 penalty to its saving throw. An
opponent so smothered must hold his breath or die. Again, one can pry
leaves loose by making a successful open doors check.

Credit: The Jupiter Bloodsucker originally appeared in the Basic module B3
Palace of the Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used
by permission. It appears in the orange-covered version (the original), not
the revised green-covered module.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jean
Wells.

Accident on the Trail
Tromping up a jungle trail, you come to the side of a small ravine where
it appears a coach has gone over the side. Indeed, in the bottom of the
ravine you see the coach, damaged but still whole, and the remains of the
drivers and horses, their flesh pale and bloodless and their bodies bloated
in the powerful sun. The ravine is covered with thick, green vegetation,
including a bed of 1d6+4 jupiter bloodsuckers.
The passengers in the coach are alive, but injured and dying of thirst. If
they hear travelers (2 in 6 chance) they will signal to let them know they
are there. The passengers were on their way to a jungle stronghold, and
include an armorer, a minstrel, the lord of the stronghold's tax collector
(an attractive woman) and an animal trainer who specializes in horses.
The coach also holds a locked iron box containing the collected taxes:
2d10 x 100 sp, 1d20 x 20 gp and 1d6 turquoise buttons worth 65 gp each.

Kamadan
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6) or snakes (1d4) and bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Sleep breath
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

The kamadan is a feline-like predator that may somehow be related to
the displacer beast. The kamadan has coarse, yellowish brown fur and a
leopard-like body and head with emerald green eyes. From its shoulders
sprout six long serpents, blackish-green in color, each about twice the
length of a normal human. The serpents’ eyes are reddish-yellow. It is
about 9 feet long and weighs about 600 pounds.
The kamadan is a fierce predator and highly territorial, hunting just
about anything that spends too much time in its territory. The kamadan
has a hunting range of about 5 or more square miles. It makes its lair
under rocky outcroppings or within caves.
Kamadans are intelligent creatures and are capable of speaking the local
common tongue with a thick accent, owing to their felinoid mouths.
Once every 1d4 rounds and no more than 5 times per day, a kamadan can
exhale a cone of sleep 30 feet long and 20 feet wide at the base. Creatures
with 4 HD or less are automatically cast into a deep slumber; creatures
with 5 HD or more are permitted a saving throw to avoid drowsing.

Poisonous Kamadan A variant kamadan, one with poisonous snakes, is rumored to exist.
Encounters with such creatures are rare, for which most adventurers are
thankful. The poisonous kamadan uses the same statistics as the normal
kamadan, but each snake head delivers a deadly poisonous bite. The
poisonous kamadan has a CL/XP of 7/600.

Credit: The Kamadan originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Nick
Louth.

Nighttime Mine Supervisor
A balmy savanna of bushwillows, elephant grass, gum acacias and
eucalyptus trees is home to an active population of bulettes and dwarven
miners. On a large outcropping of bluish, mithral-rich stone, a dwarven
armorer has established a forge fueled by the potent droppings of bulette.
The forge produces some of the finest arms and armor in the world ornate suits of platemail, round, mirror-like shields, axe-swords and
flanged maces - often incorporating bulette scales. About 40 dwarves live
in the adobe complex atop the outcropping, somewhat in fear of their
master. Iron mines are tunneled into the outcropping and patrolled at
night by the master's pet, an especially fierce kamadan. The kamadan is
kept in a mithral cage in the mines and released each night using a winch
located in the master's quarters. The adobe walls are patrolled by ten
dwarves armed with platemail, crossbows and axes.
The master's treasure consists of 1d20 x 100 sp, 1d20 x 100 gp, 1d20
pounds of mercury used for etching armor, a granite icon of the forge god
(worth 125 gp) and a jasper whistle worth 1 gp that the master uses to
control the kamadan.

Kampfult (Sinewy Mugger)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  6 tendrils (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Strangle
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

This creature is a man-sized monster resembling a tree trunk with
six long sinewy tendrils spaced evenly around the upper portion of its
body. Six smaller tendrils located at the base of its trunk seem to aid it
in locomotion. Its body is dark grayish-green and its tendrils are dark
gray changing to dark green at the tips. The kampfult haunts subterranean
realms in search of prey, grabbing any living creature that passes by.
Creatures slain by a kampfult are slowly absorbed into the base of the
trunk and digested. Kampfults do not speak, but it is thought that they can
understand the language of the drow.
A kampfult attacks from surprise, waiting until its prey moves within
reach and then lashing out with its tendrils, attempting to grab and entangle
its prey. A kampfult rarely attacks creatures larger than itself unless it is
extremely hungry. It fights until either it or its opponent is dead. Those
struck by a tendril must pass a saving throw to avoid it wrapping around
their neck and inflicting 1d4 points of damage automatically each round.
Tendrils can be removed with a successful open doors check or severed
with an edged weapon. The tendrils have an AC of 3 [16] and are severed
with 4 points of damage.

Credit: The Kampfult originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Pool of the Lost
You enter a natural cavern about 40 feet in diameter and 25 feet high
that has been carved to make the floor and walls smooth. Three holes near
the west wall and two holes near the east wall allow steam to rise into the
chamber. A chimney in the ceiling permits the steam to exit again, but the
air in the room is always warm and moist.
The floor of the cavern is concave and filled with a few feet of water,
with a 10 foot diameter island in the middle of the room. Besides the
entrance and the holes (not even large enough for a halfling), the only
obvious exit is a shaft located on the island. The shaft is covered by an
iron grate that, though heavy, is easily moved.
The pool is inhabited by a species of prehistoric, bony fish that are
only mildly dangerous (1 in 6 chance of 1d4 fish attacking, treat as 2 HD
creatures with an AC of 6 [13] and a bite attack that deals 1d4 damage).
The island is inhabited by a kampfult that is very good at playing the
part of a weird, but harmless, tree. It will not move a tendril until all
but one person has descended down the shaft, attacking the straggler and
closing the iron grate.
About 1d10x100 gold pieces lie at the bottom of the pool.

Kathlin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 hooves (1d6), bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Endurance
Move: 24
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A kathlin resembles a heavy warhorse with six legs. Black or brown
coats are the horse's most common coloring, although white-coated
kathlins are sometimes found. Eye color varies as much as fur color, but
again brown or black seems to be most common. Kathlins can be trained
to serve as mounts, and their ability to run for days without rest makes
them highly prized.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene

Steeple Chase
This encounter takes place when PCs are encamped in the forest some
distance from the nearest town. The moon is new, leaving very little light
in the sky. The land is alive with the sounds of burrowing animals and
owls taking flight. In the middle of the night, a giant riderless black horse
wanders into camp, its flanks heaving as if from a long run. A fine sheen
of sweat drips off the animal's broad sides. The horse has six muscular
legs. Leaves and pine needles stick to the animal's flanks.

A group of 15 goblins captured the kathlin and trained the horse to lead raids
on unsuspecting campers. They call it Steeple, which in their coarse language
means “far runner.” The horse's body is coated in a very sticky pine resin
that looks like sweat. Any PC running his hand down the animal's coat must
save or become stuck to the mount. If someone gets stuck, the horse charges
into the forest – dragging the unfortunate victim with it. Any PC stuck to the
kathlin takes 2d4 points of damage each round as he hits small trees and gets
hit by the animal's powerful legs.

The goblins wait until the horse charges into the forest before moving in to
scavenge whatever they can carry from the PCs’ camp. The resin wears off in an
hour, when PCs – or their lifeless bodies – fall away from the horse. If
rescued from the vicious goblins, the kathlin can easily be retrained to serve
as a mount.

Kech
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Rending claws, pass without trace, surprise on roll
of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 15/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Kechs are monkey-like humanoids standing about 6 feet tall and
weighing about 150 pounds. They have azure eyes and their bodies are
covered in leathery scales that resemble greenish-brown leaves. Kech
make their homes in trees and prefer to move through the trees rather
than on the ground. They have an almost human organization and society
among the various tribes and clans. Family units dwell in a single lair
(usually a hollowed tree or small hut built among the branches of a leafy
tree). Kechs speak their own language and have a 15% chance of speaking
the common tongue.
Kechs attack from ambush, preferring to ensnare their prey in pits,
traps, or the like. If faced with a weak adversary, they attack with a frontal
assault, seeking to kill as quickly as possible. Slain prey is dragged into
the kech's lair and devoured at the creatures’ leisure. If a kech hits with
both claw attacks, it latches onto the opponent's body and tears the flesh
for an extra 2d4 points of damage.
A kech can move across any ground— ice, snow, mud—without leaving
any footprints. Tracking a kech by nonmagical means is impossible.

Credit: The Kech originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Kech Me if You Can
In a large, temperate woodland nestled between two granite ridges,
several bands of 2d4 kech make sport of travelers who dare to pass
through the woodland. Each band will attempt to steal something from the
adventurers - a helmet, wine skin, jewel, etc - and carry it to a particularly
tall, ancient oak near the center of the woodland overlooking a shallow,
murky lake. The other bands will do their best to steal the object and get
to the tree first. Although this might appear to be little more than a silly
annoyance, for the kech it is how they assign rank, and thus territory, in
the valley. The kech mean no harm (though they also aren’t worried about
returning the stolen item, which resides in the hollow trunk of the great
tree with other stolen articles), and will react violently and in concert if
the adventurers use violence to retrieve their article.
The kech do not value the items they have stolen, and will do nothing
to stop adventurers from climbing the great tree to retrieve them. The tree
holds a brass candlestick (650 gp), a brass bust of a bearded, toothless
man (100 gp), a +2 heavy mace, a terracotta flask containing brandy (6
gp) and a moonstone worth 500 gp.

Kelp Devil
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  6 fronds (1d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Charm, immunity to electricity, resistance to fire
(50%), resistance to blunt weapons (50%), underwater
concealment
Move: 12/18 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

Kelp devils are relatives of kelpies. To the casual observer, the kelp
devil resembles a large colony of slow moving seaweed about 20 feet in
diameter. A closer look reveals six 10-foot long pseudopods extending
from its body. Kelp devils speak the common tongue.
Kelp devils are patient creatures. They lie perfectly motionless until
potential prey moves within 10 feet. Once their prey is within range, they
strike quickly with their pseudopods, attempting to grab an opponent.
Grappled creatures are dragged underwater and drowned. Slain creatures
are devoured by the kelp devil.
Twice per day, on a successful hit with a frond, a kelp devil can affect
the opponent as by charm monster. The creature can make a saving throw
to resist the effects.
Creatures hit by a kelp devil's fronds must make a saving throw or be
entwined and dragged under water to drown. Kelp devils are expert at
squeezing the air from a creature's lungs, so their victims can only hold
their breath for 1 round per 2 points of constitution before they drown.

Credit: The Kelp Devil originally appeared in the Second Edition module Return
to White Plume Mountain (© Wizards of the Coast, 1999) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Bruce
Cordell.

Admiral's Rock
On a lonely sea mount in the middle of a green sea the ex-admiral of
the Blue Brotherhood, a fleet of pirates, has constructed an impregnable
keep. The keep is designed not only to contain the admiral's treasures but
also to act as a bank for pirates. The walls of the keep are 8 feet thick near
the base and 6 feet thick at the top, which rises 5 stories above the island
and surrounding sea, with windows of leaded glass and thick, wooden
doors at the back of tunnels barred with bronze portcullises.
The keep has the latest in war engines trained on the surrounding
seas, and allows only men in small launches to approach the keep. The
keep's battlements are patrolled by a dozen swaggering pirates (2nd to
4th level fighters), but they are not the primary defenders of Admiral's
Rock. A large kelp devil patrols the waters around the rock, attacking any
person not cleared by the admiral. This is done by blowing a trumpet in a
particular tune. Without this sounding, the kelp devil shows no mercy in
sending people to a watery grave.
Among the treasures held in the keep's vaults are 4d20 x 100 sp, 1d30 x
100 gp and a large turquoise scepter worth 650 gp.

Kelpie
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Slam (see below)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Charm, amphibious, reshape form, resistance to fire
(50%), telepathy 1 mile
Move: 9/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

In their true form, kelpies are indistinguishable from normal seaweed.
They are found in saltwater and freshwater, swamps, fens, and stagnated
underground pools and lakes. In her human guise, a kelpie appears as a
beautiful female with long flowing dark hair, emerald eyes, and soft, pale
skin. She is cloaked in robes of seaweed or wears nothing at all. A kelpie
often assumes a semi-human form in which her lower torso is composed
entirely of seaweed. Kelpies speak the common tongue and possibly the
language of merfolk and tritons.
Kelpies lie in wait for their foes, most often males, and when a target
moves within range, they reshape their form to appear human. In most
cases, they take the form of a drowning woman to lure the target closer.
If the ruse is not detected and the opponent moves within reach of the
kelpie, she attacks, attempting to drown her victim. Drowned foes are
taken back to the kelpie's lair and devoured.
Once per day, a kelpie can produce an effect identical to the charm
monster spell. The target can make a saving throw to avoid the effects.
If the save fails, the victim believes the kelpie to be a very beautiful and
attractive creature, and attempts to move as quickly as possible toward
the kelpie. The kelpie can automatically grapple a charmed foe, for they
do not resist the kelpie's embrace. A charmed foe can only hold his breath
for a number of rounds equal to his Constitution. After that, he drowns.
Female creatures are immune to the kelpie's charm ability; only males
can be affected. The charm is negated if the victim dies, the kelpie dies,
or dispel magic is cast on the victim.
Kelpies can survive out of the water for 6 hours.

Credit: The Kelpie originally appeared in the First Edition module S2 White
Plume Mountain (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1979) and later in the First
Edition Fiend Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Lawrence
Schick.

Leap of Faith
Saint's College is housed in an old, fortified manor built on a rocky
peninsula that overlooks the ocean. The college trains men and women
for the priesthood or lives as sages or major domos, and usually houses
about thirty students drawn from pedigreed families. The college employs
five sages as lecturers, one of them serving as the dean. Armed guards
patrol the college grounds and the walls.
Recently, the school has run into a spot of trouble. Three young men,
all from powerful families, have gone missing. One body has been found
floating washed ashore about a mile up the coast. The guards have seen
nothing, and the dean is not prepared to deal with a matter like this. His
superiors in the church hierarchy are intent on calming matters down,
and their inquisitors have questioned all involved and discovered nothing.
The kingdom is now in an uproar, with different political factions
exchanging accusations and challenges. Two men of high birth have died
in duels and civil war appears to be on the horizon. The real culprits
of the crime are a bed of 1d4 kelpies that have taken up residence in
the waters beneath the college's dormitory windows. They arise at night,
when mists cloak the coast, and send their voices into the heads of the
students, rousing them from their slumber, bringing them to the shuttered
windows and commanding them to leap into the sea.

Khargra
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  3 claws (1d3) and bite (2d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Ruin armor and weapons, earth glide, immunity to
cold and fire
Move: 6/12 (burrowing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Khargra resembles a human-sized cylinder covered in metallic scales. It
sports three large “fins” spaced even around its circumference. Between
each fin is a metal sheath from which slide long claw-like arms. A large
hole in the front of its cylindrical body is lined with many small curved
metallic teeth and seems to function as its mouth. A khargra is a 5-foot
long cylinder and weighs about 300 pounds.
Khargras are native to the Elemental Plane of Earth and are only
encountered on the Material Plane when summoned. On occasion, a
khargra slips through a tear in the planar fabric and enters the Material
Plane to digest ores and metals not normally found on its native plane.
Khargras attack from ambush, preferring to wait just inside the wall of
a dungeon or corridor and springing out when prey passes nearby. The
khargra attempts to grab and devour any metal objects within the area.
Nonmetallic objects may be bitten, but not devoured.
A khargra's bite can tear right through armor and weapons. Khargra
can bite weapons by making a successful melee attack at a -5 penalty. If
a khargra misses an attack due to armor or a shield, their attack instead
affects the armor. In either event, the owner of the object must roll a
saving throw, rolling 1d20 and adding either the armor bonus or weapon's
damage dice and equalling or exceeding a roll of 15. If unsuccessful, the
obect is ruined.
A khargra can glide through stone, dirt, or almost any other sort of earth,
including metal, as easily as a fish swims through water. Its burrowing
leaves behind no tunnel or hole, nor does it create any ripple or other signs
of its presence. A move earth spell cast on an area containing a burrowing
khargra flings the khargra back 30 feet, stunning the creature for 1 round
unless it succeeds at a saving throw. Khargra can automatically sense the
location of anything within 60 feet that is in contact with the ground.

Credit: The Khargra originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Lawrence
Schick.

Up From the Depths
A narrow defile in the far northern lands is the last resting place of
a company of imperial surveyors. The surveyors, lead by a merchant
venturer and consisting of twelve men-at-arms, two sergeants and three
cartographers, were killed while moving through the defile on their way
to the coast, where the empress believes there is an ancient diamond mine.
The empress is quite correct; the rocky hills along the coast are very rich
in precious stones and metals, but are also home to a pack of 2d6 khargra,
summoned in depths of the mine by a wizard locked in battle with a pit
fiend and now persisting in the material plane. The khargra often leap
between the sides of the defile, and it was during one of these migrations
that they encountered the armored men of the surveying team.
The armor and weapons of the surveying team were destroyed or
consumed by the khargra, and even the sack of gems and gold coins
hidden on the venturer's body were removed. The dead surveyors do still
have a very accurate set of maps of the coast and highlands inside an
ivory mapcase. On the back of one of the maps the venture scribed notes
and sketched illustrations of a strange cavern that seemed to “breathe.”
The author believed this cavern granted access to a subterranean kingdom
his people tell stories about.

Killmoulis
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Needle (1)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Magic resistance 25%, surprise on a roll of 1-3 on
1d6, telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

A killmoulis is thought to be distantly related to brownies and other
small, helpful fey, though it bears little physical likeness to its kin.
Standing about 1 foot tall, they do not speak except through a limited form
of telepathy. The race appears to be sexless. They are unnaturally thin and
a bulbous head with no chin, seemingly no mouth and an immense, trunklike nose. A kilmoulis has pale white skin and deep blue eyes.
A killmoulis gang always tries to take up residence in places of human
habitation where foodstuffs are prepared or handled, dwelling beneath
floorboards or in garrets or behind pantry shelves. The killmoulis has
the same loyalty to its host family and eagerness to perform chores as
the brownie, but unlike the brownie they are more prone to pointless but
harmless mischief.
Killmoulises are inoffensive creatures, lacking any real combat
capability. They do carry dagger-like needles, however, and use these to
stab and pierce their opponents. Occasionally, these needles are poisoned
with whatever poison is readily available.

Credit: The Killmoulis originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Fey Hide-Away
A modest castle of gray bricks sits on a rocky mount overlooking an icy
stream. The keep of the tower has a copper roof that rises to a peak and is
topped by a brass statue of an archer. The archer in question is the mistress
of the castle, a 12th level fighting-woman who won fame and glory
competing in tournaments and wealth plundering the underworld. The
castle has a population split between humans and dwarves, the dwarves
being five religious scholars of their people who were persecuted and
exiled from a neighboring kingdom. The humans are mostly shepherds,
the scraggly hills around the castle supporting hundreds of the fluggy,
white creatures. The mistress of the castle is a devout worshipper of the
fey court, and all fey creatures, including the dwarfs, are given freedom
on her lands provided they do not harm her people or their animals. A
gang of 1d3+1 killmoulis dwell in the castle as its stewards, feasting on
aromatic resins and nosegays hung from the rafters by the mistress to
thank them for their work.

Korred
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Slam (1d4) or shears (1d6) or club (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Animate hair, laugh, magic resistance (30%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A korred has the upper torso of a small humanoid and the lower torso
of a goat, thus giving it a satyr-like appearance. It has a long, flowing
beard, and like its hair, is tangled and matted into frightful knots. It wears
a simple leather covering on which hangs a large leather pouch. Its hair
is dark and its wild, brown eyes have an almost feral-like gleam in them.
Korreds speak their own language.

Three times per day, a korred can unleash a laugh that stuns all creatures
within 60 feet that hear it for 1d2 rounds. A saving throw negates the
effects.

A korred can weave its hair (contained in its pouch) into animated ropes
that can entangle foes. The time it takes to weave enough hair to entangle
one foe is dependent on the size of the creature as follows:

=================== ============================================================
Size                Time
=================== ============================================================
Dwarves, Halflings  1 round
Elves, Humans       2 rounds
Ogres               3 rounds
=================== ============================================================

A korred cannot entangle an opponent larger than an ogre.

Credit: The Korred originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.

Whose Side Are You On?
While resting and recuperating in a roadhouse outside an apparently
quiet village of tall, stone houses and alleys of black dirt, the adventurers
will find themselves in the midst of a revolution. Recently, imperial
convoys have been attacked by “bandits” that they know were really
revolutionaries from the White Jasmine Society, a secret organization
funded by local merchants who are angry about taxation they believe is
excessive.

The leaders of the revolution, all mid- to high-level fighters, are hiding
in the village. An imperial army of 60 soldiers under the command of a
war hero have arrived to suss them out. The leader is a calm, honorable
man, but he is also determined to put down the threat to his feudal lord.
He will find the presence of the adventurers very provocative, questioning
them often and keeping them under guard 24 hours a day.

A serving woman in the inn associated with the society will, at
some point, pass a note on to the adventurers hidden beneath a loaf of
bread. The note will explain that the society has a powerful ally in the
greenwood who might be able to break the occupying army if he can
be found. The ally is a korred (or perhaps a gang of korreds), who are
difficult to negotiate with but will respond to a silk scarf embroidered
with a white lotus.

Kuah-Lij
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4 hp
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: weapon (1d4)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: None
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: A/5

A kuah-lij resembles a halfling who has been stretched vertically to the
height of a human. Its features are knobby and elongated. Its hair is light
and downy, more akin to a soft fur than anything else, and its skin is white
with pale blue undertones. They are natural tinkerers and enjoy creating
bizarre contraptions.

Aboleth, Aboleth,
Where Do You Roam?
Ten people top the next rise, each walking stiffly through the prairie
grasses. Their clothes and skin are coated with dripping slime. Dragging
itself behind the walkers is a monstrous aboleth. The grotesque creature
pulls itself along with its tentacles. Riding atop the aboleth in a small
metal enclosure are five tall halflings. They caper and laugh uproariously
when one of the walkers trips and falls. Each humanoid carries a slingshot
he uses to hit the walkers in the backs of their heads with water-filled
balloons. A trail of slime marks the aboleth's progress through the
grasslands.
The five halfling-like creatures are actually kuah-lij. The walkers are
villagers from Shum who offended the kuah-lij. The odd-looking
humanoids returned with their enslaved aboleth and charmed
and slimed the villagers. The metal box on the aboleth's head
is a control station linked into the creature's brain that allows
the kuah-lij to control its movements and attacks. The kuah-lij
don’t mean to kill the villagers, just humiliate them. They pelt
the slimed villagers with water balloons to keep them damp to protect
them from the adverse effects of the aboleth slime.
If the control platform is knocked loose from the aboleth's head, it frees
the beast to attack on its own. It is fully aware of what has been done to it
and lashes out at everyone nearby.

Credit: The Kuah-Lij can be found in the Necromancer Games module Dead Man's
Chest (©2005 Bill Webb and Clark Peterson, Necromancer Games, Inc.).

Copyright Notice: Author Lance Hawvermale.

Land Lamprey
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d3)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Attach, blood drain
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Land lampreys are 3-foot long, blackish-green eels with large, downward
facing mouths lined with sharpened teeth. They can be found in all but the
hottest and the coldest environments and prefer the dark and dampness of
the subterranean world and so are most often encountered there.
If a land lamprey hits with a bite attack, it latches onto the opponent's
body and drains 1d4 hp per round by draining the victim's blood.
An application of fire causes the land lamprey to releases its hold and
move away from the source of the flame. The lamprey can also be pulled
off with a successful open doors check, though doing so inflicts 1d4
points of damage. Once a land lamprey has dealt 8 points of damage, it
detaches and slithers off to digest the meal. If its victim dies before the
land lamprey's appetite has been sated, the land lamprey detaches and
seeks a new target.

Credit: The Land Lamprey originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Fetid Sewers
Beneath a brick townhouse occupied by the owner of a scriptorium
there runs a dank, cramped sewer tunnel - a remnant of the foundations
of the ancient city but still in use for drainage from the driving rains that
plague the city-state. Though most folk know nothing of these tunnels,
the local thieves’ guild long ago learned of their existance from an ancient
map stolen from the city hall.
An iron grate in the arched ceiling of the brick tunnel allows access to
the crawl space beneath the townhouse - perhaps adventurers will learn of
its existance while in the townhouse as customers or thieves, or perhaps
they will come to this spot via the drainage tunnels while hunting thieves
or doing some thieveing themselves.
The tunnel is six feet high, the floor angled to create a stream of water
during a rain, and a chain of brackish pools in between rains. The thieves
always enter the tunnels with flaming oil and torches, for they know
that encounters with swarms of 1d6+5 land lampreys occur often (3 in 6
chance per hour), not to mention giant rats and lesser slimes. Besides the
iron grates that give access to crawlspaces, alleys and abandoned tunnels
and buildings, there are a number of secret doors in the tunnels that lead
to chambers that the thieves use as safe houses and places to store their
loot. A typical hiding place might contain 1d6 x 100 gp worth of treasure.
The air in the tunnels is dank and foul and travelers in these tunnels
must cover their mouths or save (-1 penalty per hour in the tunnels) or
come down with a hacking cough.

Lantern Goat
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7 or 14
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 7 HD: butt (1d8) and 2 hooves (1d6); 14 HD: butt
(2d6) and 2 hooves (1d8)
Saving Throw: 9 or 3
Special: Fear light, soul capture
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7 HD (10/1,400); 14 HD (17/3,500)

A lantern goat has tangled and patchy gray-and-white hair, and horns
and hooves that appear to be made of stone. Its eyes are stark white.
Around its neck hangs a dented and ugly iron lantern that glows with
a foul amber light. The scarred and battered lantern serves to channel
souls into the undead creature. It emits an ugly yellow light that causes all
creatures within 60 feet who see it to flee in fear (as per the spell of the
same name) if they fail a save. Any creature slain while within 60 feet of
a lantern goat must save or have its soul drawn into the goat's lantern to
be digested. Only a wish can return creatures to life after they have been
consumed by the lantern goat.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Lance Hawvermale.

Chariot of Dire
Rumbling through the night barrels the chariot of death. Four lantern
goats pull a black chariot resembling a horned grinning skull. The
Harvester, a mercenary with the Dogs of Orcus, drives the goat team in
a never-ending quest to collect mortal souls. He carries a lance, spear
and a whip, and wears red plate armor made from the shell of a stygian
turtle-shark. The Harvester is blind and his plated helm has no visor. The
Harvester has a unique connection with the lantern goats where as he
can “see” and detect life through their eyes. If the goats are slain, The
Harvester is effectively blinded until he can enlist more goats. By day,
the chariot, driver and goats are swallowed safely by the earth and only
rerun when the moon once again shines. Once The Harvester is slain, the
chariot sinks into the earth but resumes its quest for souls when a suitable
cleric of Orcus is found to replace the slain Harvester.

The Harvester: HD 12 (cleric of Orcus); HP 64; AC 3[16]; Atk 1
lance (2d4+1), 1 spear (1d6+2) or 1 whip (1d2 + trip); Move
12; Save 4; CL/XP 12/2,000; Special: Spells. 4/4/4/4/4/1;
Spells: 1—cure light wounds, detest evil, detect magic,
protection from evil; 2—bless, hold person (x2), silence
(15-foot radius); 3—locate object, prayer, remove curse,
speak with dead; 4—cure serious wounds neutralize poison,
protection from evil (10-foot radius), sticks to snakes; 5—
commune, finger of death, quest, raise dead; 6—word of
recall; Equipment: +3 Red Stygian Turtle-Shark Plate Mail, +2
Dragon Bone Spear

Lava Child
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Immunity to earth magic, fire and metal, double
damage from cold
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

This creature is a stocky humanoid standing about 5 or 6 feet tall with
sooty-black hair and green eyes. It wears crudely constructed hides of fur
and leather. Its face has a curious, almost child-like appearance and seems
to be imprinted with a permanent, non-changing smile. Its skin is pinkishwhite. Lava children make their lairs deep underground and usually in
warmer climates. Some lava children build their communities in dying
or burned out volcanoes as well. Their society as a whole is reclusive,
and rarely do lava children have dealings with outside races (magmin
and fire elementals being the exception). Lava children speak their own
gibberish-like tongue.

Lava children take one extra point of damage per caster level from
water spells and suffer double damage from cold spells and effects. Lava
children are immune to all earth spells and to any metal object or weapon
and its effects (swords, armor, doors, walls, for example). Metal simply
passes through the lava child as though it did not exist. Metal items are not
destroyed, just ignored. Any metal weapon (including magic weapons)
that strikes a lava child deals no damage and simply passes through its
body. Likewise a lava child can simply walk through metal doors or walls
as though they did not exist and ignore bonuses to an opponent's Armor
Class due to metal armor.

Credit: The Lava Children originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jim
Donohoe.

All Shall Burn
In lava tubes beneath a dormant volcano there dwells a band of 1d10+6
lava children. The lava children have constructed a number of chambers
in the lava tubes, mostly through the use of slave labor taken from
the tribes who dwell in the jungles surrounding the volcano. The lava
children know secret tunnels beneath the forest and hidden paths. The
jungle tribes carve images of the lava children - the mountain spirits - on
wooden masks and basalt statues - images of smiling demons with empty
eyes.
The chambers of the lava children appear have no real purpose. They
are all octagonal, with precious stones set into the walls. A magic-user or
cleric might be able to identify the gem patterns as constellations. The
lava children are following the instructions of their master, a flame entity
imprisoned on the Astral Plane that seeks escape. Each chamber is attuned
to a collection of eight constellations, and when those constellations are
in the correct positions in space a chamber is filled with a portion of the
flame entity's spirit. Currently, six such chambers are filled with a roiling
pillar of flame that deals damage as a wall of fire if touched.
There are still 12 empty chambers. When those chambers are filled,
the entity will have returned to the Material Plane and woe betide the
people of the jungle. Deeper than the fire chambers there are several more
chambers, including a prison for the slaves (3d4 slaves at any one time),
a living chamber for the lava children and a temple to the flame entity,
complete with a basalt altar stone studded with tiny garnets (worth a total
of 50 gp if collected) and a marble altar depicting an abstract column of
flames - far too complex for it to have been the work of the lava children.
The living chamber of the lava children contains 2d20 x 100 gp, a brass
trencher worth 750 gp, a copper brooch depicting a smiling lava child
(worth 75 gp), a brass scepter inlaid with red marble (worth 145 gp), a
tiger's eye gem worth 165 gp and a piece of jet worth 400 gp.

Leech, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Attach, blood drain, disease, salt vulnerability
Move: 3/9 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Giant leeches appear as larger versions of the common leech. There is
a 50% chance that any leech encountered carries disease. A giant leech
attacks any living creature that comes within 30 feet of it.
If a giant leech hits with a bite attack, it latches onto the opponent's
body. An attached giant leech drains blood, dealing 1d6 points of damage
per round. Once it has dealt 12 points of damage, it detaches and slithers
off to digest the meal. If its victim dies before the giant leech's appetite
has been sated, the giant leech detaches and seeks a new target. A giant
leech can be pulled off with a successful open doors check, but doing so
inflicts 1d6 points of damage.
A giant leech takes 1d4 points of damage per pound of salt poured on
its body.

Credit: The Giant Leech originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Leeches Get Their Just Due
The swampy lowlands that the upland villages from the market town on
the coast are dotted with a number of tall, bronze beacons. Each pillar is
hollow and filled with several gallons of lamp oil, allowing them to burn
for several days. The pillars are connected by thick ropes, allowing traders
to traverse the swamp in their flat-bottom boats, pulling themselves along
from one beacon to the next and finding their way to the coast without
getting lost.
The swamp traders are a hardy breed, usually fighting-men of 2nd to
5th level, and they are assisted by groups of 4 to 9 men-at-arms in leather
armor and carrying crossbows and spears. The boats carry all sorts of
cargo, from foodstuffs to hides and pelts to rare herbs.
Among the dangers of the swamp, the most pernicious are the giant
leeches. The leeches usually appear in swarms of 1d10+5, and the traders
keep sacks of salt on board to drive them away.
Just three days earlier, a heist of the lord mayor's jewels took place,
pulled off by a visiting band of thieves. The thieves sought to hide the
jewels in the swamp, dropping a locked chest into the swamp at the base
of a beacon that they marked with a glyph (those who know the cant will
be able to identify it). Unfortunately, the thieves were ill-prepared for the
giant leeches, and their bodies now lie at the bottom of the swamp with
the jewels.
The locked chest contains two electrum hair pins tipped with rose quartz
(worth 50 gp each), a steel tiara inlaid with the chitin of a giant crab and
set with a moss agate (worth 150 gp), a gold signet ring bearing the lord
mayor's arm (worth 200 gp) and a brass hookah with platinum filagree
(worth 150 gp).

Leprechaun
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Dagger (1d3)
Saving Throw: 18 (16 vs. magic)
Special: Spells, magic resistance 60%
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Leprechauns are short fey creatures, about 2 feet tall. They favor
brightly colored clothes, particularly greens and reds. Leprechauns are a
jovial people, enjoying fine food and drink; some leprechauns also enjoy
a good smoke from a long-stemmed pipe. They are a tricky folk and
enjoy jokes and pranks, although they usually do not appreciate being the
victims of such acts.

Most leprechauns are skilled pickpockets (as 8th level thieves), and it
is a favored prank of these wee folk to filch items from unsuspecting
travelers in their domain and then taunt the intruders into pursuit. The
leprechaun so involved in the prank often alternates between being
visible and invisible as he teases and pesters his pursuers in a merry chase.
Leprechauns tire of pranks quickly, however, and will give up the stolen
item and sneak away. Some say leprechauns are descendants of halflings
and pixies. Leprechauns summarily dismiss this rumor, however, scoffing
at those who repeat it.

Leprechauns can cast invisibility (self only), phantasmal force,
polymorph (objects only) and ventriloquism at will.

Credit: The Leprechaun originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax

Practical Joke
As you move through a shady wood, you come across a clearing. The
clearing is marked by five pillars of chalk and in the middle there is a
large, bronze cauldron. Three maidens, with long, braided hair and in
diaphenous gowns sit around the cauldron, plucking at mandolins and
singing drowsy love ballads. The cauldron is heaped with gold coins and
jewels and covered by the pelt of an aurumvorax (q.v.).
This entire scene is, alas, a prank concocted by a terribly wicked gang
of leprechauns. Perhaps the leprechauns have something against the
adventurers or perhaps they’re just world class jerks - it's hard to say
with the fey.
The maidens are actually a trio of orc bandits (3 HD each) arguing
over their empty cauldron. The chalk stones are their warriors, five orc
warriors in leather armor with white shields, short swords and pole arms.
The orcs will not immediately understand why their visitors are so bold
or refering to them as maidens and what not, but they’re crafty enough
to play along if it seems they can bag dinner. The 1d3+1 leprechauns
will remain out of sight, though when the illusion is dispelled one will
certainly hear their peels of laughter echoing from the woods.
The orcs have a treasure buried nearby in leather sacks. It consists
of 2d12 x 10 cp, 1d10 x 10 sp, 2d12 x 10 gp and a small wooden box
containing a pound of saffron (worth 15 gp).

Lich Shade
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6 + chill)
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Chill, death throes, spell leech, resists cold and
electricity, spell resistance (22%)
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2,600

A lich shade is a rotting and skeletal humanoid dressed in tattered and
worn robes with ancient runes etched on their surface. Its eye blaze with
a crimson fire. Lich shades are evil creatures who attempted to achieve
lichdom but failed. A lich shade stands about 6 to 6-1/2 feet tall and
weighs about 160 pounds. The robes and gowns it wears often denote its
previous life's profession. A lich shade's touch is supernaturally cold, so
any creature struck by one of its claws must save or be dazed for 1 round.
When reduced to 0 hp, a lich shade crumbles into a pile of dust
equivalent to dust of sneezing and choking. When a spellcaster within 50
feet of a lich shade attempts to cast a spell, he must save or lose the spell
as it is absorbed by the creature. The lich shade can cast the spell on its
next turn, turn the spell into a bolt of magic energy (similar to a magic
missile) that does 1d6 points of damage per two levels of the original
spell cast, or gain a number of hp equal to the spell level x 4.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Images of Ages Past
Only the top two levels of this crumbled tower remains. The upper
portion floats 60 feet above the lower ruins of the foundation. A partial
stone staircase that once followed the interior wall hangs down from the
floating partial tower. The tower's foundation looks as if it exploded from
the inside in a massive blast that scattered the black bricks outward across
the land. Someone built a 40-foot-tall scaffold of bound wooden poles
beneath the floating tower in a vain effort to reach the suspended stairs.
Stout vines growing from the sides of the floating tower drape down until
they are almost within arms reach of the top of the scaffold. The tower
belonged to Ashten Un Shorn, a magic-user who died during an attempt
to transition to lichdom. A single mistake in the ritual resulted in the blast
that destroyed her tower. Ashten now haunts the upper floors as a lich
shade, and slays all who seek her treasure. Stories tell of her wondrous
lantern that lantern reveals past events in any area where its light shines.

Livestone
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 10 [9]
Attack:  Slam (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Engulf, solidify, immunity to petrification, surprise on
1-4 on 1d6
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Livestone is a strange species of ooze that can solidify itself into a
consistency that very closely resembles that of stone. In its solidified
form, a livestone is indistinguishable from a normal boulder or slab of
rock. No one is quite sure from where livestones originated, but ancient
legends say that the dwarves accidentally unleashed these horrors on the
surface world by digging into their subterranean lairs. Eventually, some
livestones found their way to the surface.
Livestones are incredibly long-lived, solidifying and entering a form
of hibernation and remaining that way indefinitely until a food source
wanders too near. Livestones have a simple chameleon-like ability to
mimic local stone by ingesting a small sample and adjusting its own color
and texture to match. A hibernating livestone can become covered in
moss and lichens to further the deception.
Livestones generally attack from ambush, waiting for a potential meal
to pass before flowing into their ooze form and rushing up to engulf the
prey. If the surprise attack fails, a livestone resorts to hammering with
pseudopods. When attacking in this manner, a livestone will solidify the
tip of the pseudopod and strike with a hammer-like blow. A livestone's
usual tactic is to solidify the half of its body facing the prey and then send
hard-tipped pseudopods out from behind this shield.
A livestone can simply mow down human-sized or smaller creatures by
moving over them. It cannot make a slam attack during a round in which it
engulfs. The livestone affects as many creatures as it can cover. Opponents
can attempt a saving throw to avoid being engulfed; on a success, they are
pushed back or aside (opponent's choice) as the livestone moves forward.
An engulfed opponent takes 1 point of damage per round as the livestone
consumes it (unless the livestone solidifies itself).
A livestone that has engulfed an opponent can instantly solidify its
form, dealing 8d6 points of crushing damage per round to the trapped
victim (saving throw for half damage).
An engulfed creature can be freed by killing the livestone or by casting
stone to flesh on the livestone. This deals 1d6 points of damage per caster
level to the livestone and automatically ejects an engulfed victim.
An opponent attacking a livestone must succeed on a saving throw each
time his attack hits. If the save is failed, the livestone actually solidifies
the portion of its body at the instant it was hit, cutting damage in half. A
livestone cannot attack if its entire form is solidified.
Livestones surprise on a roll of 1-4 on 1d6 in stony areas.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Dangerous Crossing
You come across a swift subterranean river, about 40 feet wide. Two
large boulders rest in the middle of the river, which is about 5 to 7 feet
deep. The stones rise about 3 feet above the surface and one has a rope
tied to it and extending to rocks on each shore. A small boat on the shore
(the side the adventurers are on) provides a way across, for swimming
would be exceptionally difficult in the current and even pulling one's way
across on the boat requires a combined strength of 20 to keep it from
being pulled down the river.
The second stone in the river is topped by a livestone in its solidified
state. When a band of adventurers reach the midpoint of the river, it will
take ooze form, make a leap at the nearest adventurer and then attempt to
drag them overboard while taking its solidified form. The ooze is a pure
predator, uninterested in destroying the others or taking their loot.

Living Lake (Agrath-Ogh)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 4 slams (3d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Engulf, spells
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

Hundreds of feet across, a living lake is an ooze of truly colossal
proportions. The protoplasmic body of a living lake is fluid in nature and
transparent in water. A living lake attacks by forming pseudopods from
its oozy form and pummeling its opponents. The ooze can raise a portion
of itself off the ground and come crashing down on opponents who must
save or be engulfed into the ooze and “drown” in the living lake. A living
lake casts spells as a 9th-level druid.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Peace Among Evil
Hordes of orcs inhabit the badlands below the receding Wailing Glacier.
The land is a jumble of rotting refuse and vast marshes left behind as the
glacier melts. Many treasures have been revealed as the ice melts. One
such treasure is the astonishing Parish of Iseleine, an exotic community
built around a perfectly round lake of crystal clear water that remains
pristine under an ice dome within the glacier. The lake has a ceramic
tiled bottom and contains swarms of golden trout and edible freshwater
anemones. The pool is also home to a living lake that has absorbed the
pacifist ideas of the followers of Iseleine. The Wailing Glacier has thawed
enough for explorers to navigate the ice caves to visit the parish.
The citizens of the city strictly follow the passive teachings of the
dreaming goddess, Iseleine. They speak ancient common and have
whimsical customs and mannerisms. The followers of Iseleine are passive
to the extreme. The dreamy followers practice freedom and love in every
sense of the words. They value art and harmony above all; values of the
outside world are merely trappings of the flesh to them.
The living lake protects the Parish of Iseleine against all transgressors.
The living lake is not above violence when defending the followers.
The citizens still weep in anguish over the death of hundreds of orcs
who attempted to destroy the Parish. The followers pray for
Iseleine's forgiveness at the death of the orcs and are
preparing the corpses for ceremonial burial.

Lizard, Cavern
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Grab
Move: 9/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Cavern lizard are 8-foot-long gray lizards with wide feet and sapphiregold bulging eyes. Their legs are thick and muscled and their large feet
have small suction cup-like pads on the bottoms that aid in climbing.
Its head is angular and somewhat flat. Its mouth sports a row of long,
serrated teeth. These very aggressive hunters latch onto prey with their
bite, automatically dealing damage each round thereafter.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Leaping Lizards
The Noblett family has farmed the land for years, taking advantage
of a water-filled cave entrance that provides water for their cattle year
round. Just weeks ago the water began to slowly recede into the cave.
Each day the farmers and cattle must travel farther back into the bore
hole to get to the water. Once the water lowered, a pair of mated cavern
lizards escaped into the surface world to hunt larger prey. Soon, the
cavern lizards devoured the cattle and most of the Noblett family, leaving
only Granny Noblett and her young niece and nephew. She pleads for any
travelers to search the cave for her family or the lost cattle. She claims to
have seen horned, cloven-footed demons wandering at night around the
family's fields. Due to her failing eyesight, she actually mistook roaming
goats standing to feed on low branches as the horned humanoid. Only
Granny Noblett's son-in-law remains alive, trapped in the cave under
a low rock shelf. The lizards scale the walls, waiting to leap down on
anyone entering the cave.

Lizard, Fire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10+1
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 claws (1d8), bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Breathe fire, immunity to fire, double damage from
cold
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1700

Fire lizards are often called “false dragons.” Despite their general
resemblance to dragons, sages have as yet found no evidence of these
creatures being in any way related to them. Fire lizards look like wingless
dragons with gray scales dappled in red and brown. Its underbelly is
bright red and its yes are black with yellow pupils. A fire lizard is averages
30 feet long but can grow to almost twice that size. Fire lizards do not
associate with or keep company with dragons. Once every 1d4 rounds, a
fire lizard can breathe fire in a 20-foot cone. Creatures in the area take 2d6
points of fire damage (saving throw for half).

Credit: The Fire Lizard originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Shooting the Pipeline
A large fire lizard with a crooked leg and a crest like a rooster has
taken up residence in an old lava tube that leads well into the depths of a
dormant, though still quite warm, volcano. The slopes around the tube are
quite verdant and support an especially rare orchid fed upon by a species
of wasp.
Before the coming of the fire lizard, the tube was inhabited by a band of
cast-off grimlocks who were driven into the jungle by the beast. They left
behind an ivory sculpture of a portly man in a flowing robe that covers
him from nose to feet and a conical hat that contains a secret poison needle
that can be operated by pressing the small of its back. In addition, there
are a number of leather sacks containing coins and a few arrows fletched
with dire corby feathers in a quiver made from a fire beetle carapace.
The tube is about 10 feet in diameter for most of its length, with the
outer tube (i.e. before it enters the volcano proper) often opened to the
skies. Once one has entered the volcano things become notably warmer
and the tube is intersected by several smaller tubes, home to a breed of
especially nasty black rats and (if you’re feeling particularly saucy) a
pack of 1d6+2 wererats.

Lizard, Gnasher
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8)
Special: swallow whole, severing bite
Move: 10
Saving Throw: 8
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A gnasher lizard is typically 10 feet to 20 feet long and weighs about
1,000 pounds. Gnasher lizards have a wide gaping maw filled with double
rows of dagger-like teeth. Its head is large and flat and sports a ridge of
hardened bone that runs the length of its head before tapering off near the
middle of its back. Its four legs end in large, flat clawed feet. A gnasher
lizard that rolls 4 or higher than needed to hit a creature swallows the
victim whole. If the lizard rolls a natural 20, it severs an opponent's limb.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Party Wagon
A large sled pulled by two gnasher lizards crashes through the
countryside. A party of drunken goblins sits atop a dead bowhead whale
strapped to the sled, some of the loathsome creatures missing arms and
legs. The goblins sing and revel with vigor, many too inebriated to fight
let alone stand. The goblins discovered the dead whale washed ashore
a couple of days ago and decided to bring it home. The whale will feed
their clan for many weeks and its bones will make excellent weapons.
The goblins celebrate their prize as they drive the 50 miles inland to their
camp. The whale has already begun to rot, a fact that doesn’t seem to
bother the goblins. It leaves a trail of blood and congealed blubber in its
wake. The driver immediately releases the gnasher lizards at the first sign
of trouble. The semi-trained gnasher lizards normally do not attack the
goblins. Aside from the decaying whale, the goblins have little treasure.

Lurker Above
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Buffet (1d8)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Amorphous, smother, half damage from blunt
weapons
Move: 6/15 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

The lurker above is a subterranean carnivore that preys on any living
creatures that enter its territory. It looks something like a massive manta
ray. Its body is black on the top and gray on the underbelly. A lurker's
underbelly tends to blend in with stone, allowing a lurker pressed against
a ceiling a 4 in 6 chance to surprise opponents below.
Lurkers above are extremely territorial and are never encountered with
others of their kind. Mating habits among lurkers is unknown to sages as
no two of these creatures have ever been encountered together. A typical
lurker above has a hunting territory of several square miles.
A lurker above can try to wrap a creature in its body as an attack that
ignores armor bonuses to Armor Class. If successful, it establishes a hold
and deals buffet damage each round the hold is maintained. A wrapped
opponent must hold its breath or suffocate. A grabbed opponent can
hold her breath for 2 rounds per point of constitution. Attacks that hit an
engulfing lurker above deal half their damage to the monster and half to
the trapped victim.

Lurker Below The lurker below is an aquatic variety of lurker above that makes its
lair in any body of water and in any climate (though it rarely lairs in
extremely cold climates). Lurkers below are pale blue or black in color
and are often mistaken for giant manta rays. Lurkers below cannot fly, but
have a swim speed of 15. They are otherwise identical to their land-based
counterparts detailed above, except they lie in wait on the sea floor and
attack from below.

Credit: The Lurker Above originally appeared in the Strategic Review #3 (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1975) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Gray Pavilion Oasis
While traversing the empty, blazing expanse of the desert, you come
across what can only be a mirage. Rising above the cracked, red soil is
a pavilion of gray stone with a rounded top held up by twelve pillars.
Between the pillars, gauzy purple curtains billow in the wind. The
pavilion is about 30 feet in diameter and contains a small pool of clear
water. The ceiling of the pavilion is the lair of a lurker above, one of
several that dwell in the caves that dot the sandstone hills around the
desert. This one was driven out into the desert by competition with larger
lurkers and now subsists on foolish travelers.

Lythic
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 slams (1d4+2)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Earth glide, blend with stone
Move: 12/18 (burrow)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Lythics are 5- or 6-foot-tall humanoids composed of smoothly-carved
rock. Their features are human-like but emotionless. Related to earth
elementals, lythics are shy creatures that tend to flee rather than confront
people. They are experts at blending into stone, and use this camouflage
technique to seemingly vanish if threatened. Lythics can glide effortlessly
stone and dirt like a fish through water.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Sentinel of Ice and Stone
Jutting like serrated teeth from the icy waves leading into the Ebon
Straits are the 10 Sentinels of Ice and Stone that presage the way to
the icy northern seas. Each granite pillar is barely 80 feet in diameter,
but rises more than 100 feet off the turbulent ocean. Ice winds in thick
bands around the stone, creating slick cliff ledges that can nevertheless
be carefully climbed like a winding ramp around the rock. The 10 pillars
are all located within sight of one another in a quarter-mile ocean area.
Rumors says that atop one of the pillar stands a being of living stone –
although which pillar is a matter of debate among seafarers. The creature
is said to answers questions for sailors, but just as often predicts hideous
fates.
The sentinel is actually a lythic cursed to live atop the stone pillars and
await sailors seeking their fate. The lythic moves randomly between the
pillars each day, vanishing from one perch to appear atop another stone
column. Getting to the top of a pillar is difficult, as the ice ramps are
treacherous and slick, and the waves and wind are always present
to toss climbers into the brine. The lythic won’t move or answer
questions until at least 1,000 gp in coins are placed at its feet,
and the truthfulness of its answer often depends on how it
is treated by the questioners. The gold sinks into the pillar,
never to be seen again, once the question is answered. If
attacked, the lythic melts into the stone and reappears on
another pillar.

Magmoid
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 1 flaming slam (2d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Melt normal weapons, magma blast, immune to
fire, sleep and poison
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Magmoids are large, sentient, spherical balls of liquid fire and rock
about 10 feet across. Small bubbling pockets on the magmoid's form
serve as sensory organs. A giant magmoid, measuring 30 feet across is
thought to exist, though none have ever seen it. A magmoid attacks by
spraying a blast of superheated magma at opponents or by slamming into
and rolling over them. The magmoid's body is composed of molten rock
that melts any nonmagical weapon that hits it. Once every 1d4 rounds, a
magmoid can release a line of magma up to 40 feet (2d6 damage, save
for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Great Ball of Fire
This encounter takes place in an extremely long 10-foot-wide corridor
with a 10-foot high ceiling. The corridor rises at a 20-degree angle. The
marble floor is scorched and burnt, with a trench coated in ash and soot
cut through the center of the tiles. The walls and ceiling have similar
grooves cut through them. Each trench is concave, with rounded edges. A
flickering, fiery glow illuminates the end of the tunnel.

A magmoid lives in a chamber, and uses the corridor as a “track” to roll
down on intruders into its underground lair. The fiery creature waits for
PCs to get about three-quarters of the way up the corridor, then rolls at
top speed toward them. Since the magmoid is rolling downhill, it gains
+6 to its movement. The 10-foot-diameter ball of fire completely fills the
tunnel as it rushes forward. Its edges fit perfectly into the grooves on the
walls, floor and ceiling.

A burnt skeleton lies in a charred heap in the magmoid's chamber. The
thief wears boots of speed, although they are dingy with gray ash. The
thief ran down the hall before the magmoid entered the corridor, but
collapsed, utterly exhausted. The angry magmoid rolled over him again
and again.

Magnesium Spirit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Touch (2 strength)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Blinding flash, level drain, strength damage,
possession, magic resistance (40%), vulnerability to holy
water
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1700

A magnesium spirit is a human-sized column of heatless white fire with
a wispy tail protruding from the bottom of it. The magnesium spirit is an
chaotic creature from an unknown plane, though it is agreed among sages
that its origin definitely does not lie on the Material Plane. Believed to
have been summoned by magic-users to do their bidding, the magnesium
spirit desires nothing more than to return to its home plane. Its incorporeal
form prevents this, however, and it requires a physical body to complete
the spell ritual needed to return it home.

Three times per day, a magnesium spirit can flare up its body in a
blinding flash. All creatures within 20 feet viewing the flash must succeed
on a saving throw or be blinded (as the blindness spell) for 1d2 hours.

A magnesium spirit's incorporeal touch ignores armor bonuses to AC.
If the magnesium spirit touches a creature, it deals 2 points of strength
damage and the victim must pass a saving throw or be drained of one
level. This begins the process of possession (per a magic jar spell). A
magnesium spirit that is possessing a victim automatically deals 2 points
of strength damage and drains one level each round. After two rounds,
the possessing magnesium spirit can only be harmed by holy water,
which inflicts 2d4 points of damage. After three rounds, the possession
is complete. If the victim still has at least 5 levels, the magnesium spirit
completes the spell ritual and both body and spirit disappear. If the victim
does not have at least 5 levels, the magnesium spirit abandons it and
searches for another.

As an incorporeal creature, a magnesium spirit can only be harmed by
magic weapons or spells.

Credit: The Magnesium Spirit originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Nick
Louth.

Don’t Go Into the Light
The mountain guides all know about the sarcophagus in the middle of
the volcano, and everybody has a story, all a bit different, about how it
got there and when. The volcano in question is a dead stratovolcano, the
caldera filled with a pristine lake that freezes over in the winter. In the
center of the lake there is a small, perfectly round island that the guides
will assure visitors is not natural. They are correct on his fact. The island
is a pillar of pumice, 10-ft in diameter and about 20 feet long. The pillar
floats, with about 2 feet of it clearing the surface of the water. A thick
chain keeps it anchored to the bottom of the lake.
Standing on the pillar is a sarcophagus of blue steel. The sarcophagus
is 5 feet tall and cast in the shape of a hauntingly beautiful woman, eyes
closed, hands clasped as in prayer. Thick chains are wrapped around the
sarcophagus and secured by heavy locks of the same material, which,
although not as strong as adamantite is stronger than steel.
A magnesium spirit has been sealed in the sarcophagus, although it is
unknown by whom. The spirit is nearly crazed with its desire to return
to its home dimension (or planet, depending on your campaign world).
Resting in the bottom of the sarcophagus there is a golden ring set
with a large piece of smoky, gray glass that allows a person wearing it
to transform their body into any material the glass touches, at will, for
1d6+1 rounds.

Mandragora
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 tentacle slaps (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Constrict, light blindness, resistance to fire (50%),
magic resistance (10%)
Move: 12/9 (burrowing)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

The mandragora is a vaguely humanoid looking plant creature with
mottled green and brown flesh. Its lower roots are splayed and resemble
legs and feet. Its upper roots are long and resemble humanoid arms. Its
head, if it could be called that, is a mass of solid vegetable matter covered
in lumps. The mandragora stands about 5 feet tall and weighs about 120
pounds.
The mandragora is carnivorous and relishes the taste of human flesh. If
it goes more than three days without devouring flesh, it burrows into the
ground and attaches to local tree roots, from which it draws its sustenance
until living prey can be found.
A mandragora attempts to grab its prey and strangle it, inflicting 1d4
points of damage per round. Slain creatures are covered in a thick layer of
mucus and slime and devoured at the mandragora's leisure.
Abrupt exposure to bright light stuns the mandragora for 1 round. On
subsequent rounds, they are dazzled and suffer a -1 penalty to hit as long
as they remain in the affected area.

Credit: The Mandragora originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Over the Woods and Through the Hills
Amala, daughter of King Theod was stolen away in the night by a band
of crafty wererats who entered the stronghold of her father in the guise
of animals and, with the help of the native rats (who despise the king and
his Lord Keeper of the Royal Pantries), made their way to her room. The
touch of a slim, crystal wand stole her soul away, leaving her body in a
state between life and death.
The king is frantic with worry and has ordered all brave men of his
kingdom to find his daughter, offering rich rewards and a potential
royal wedding if they do (he has little intention of keeping all of these
promises).
The rats escaped the stronghold and made their swiftly to the south,
through the thick woodlands of the moss dwarves, over the craggy hills
of the huldra-folk and finally into the infamous green chasm, a rent
across the barren landscape populated by a thick, primordial wood and all
manner of strange, reptilian beasts.
Hidden beneath the overarching boughs there is a small building of graygreen brick shaped like a rounded cylinder. The building has no entrance,
per se, though a number of small cracks and gaps allowed the wererats to
enter and place their precious burden atop a cruel, iron-toothed trap, itself
hidden beneath a black bearskin. A grab for the crystal will trip the trap,
which deals 1d8 points of damage unless a saving throw is passed. If the
damage is “8”, the trap has shattered the victim's arm.
The ground around the little building are infested with a colony of 3d6
mandragoras, all trained to ignore the wererats. The wererats use this
building, and others like it spread around the kingdom, as hiding places
to stash their loot.
The wererats were hired by a baronet, a gangly, awkward gentleman
with high ambitions, to steal away the princess’ soul and keep it well
hidden for two weeks. At that point, they are to carry it to his manor that
he might return it to the king and claim the princess’ hand in marriage.
A magic-user and hated rival of the king (old adventurers on opposite
sides of the law vs. chaos debate) provided the baronet with the crystal
and, unbeknownst to him, will provide the corpse of the supposed culprit.

Mantari
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Tail sting (1d6)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: None
Move: 3/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Mantari sustain themselves on a diet of rats, carrion, and subterranean
plants, but prefer the taste of fresh meat, particularly humans and gnomes.
Mantari appear as large manta rays, gray in color, with a long smooth
tail that ends in a sharpened barb. The mantari flies silently through its
underground world in search of prey, and when encountered, it is often
hungry and immediately attacks.

Credit: The Mantari originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by David
Wormell.

Pilgrims for Winter Solstice Feast
Not all underworlds are hidden from the view of men. In the far
western portions of a great kingdom there is a great underworld complex
of limestone caves often visited by pilgrims. The pilgrims seek out a
stone formation called the Throne of Judgment, where they believe their
cthonic deity once sat while he held court over the fey and spirits of the
departed. Small bands of pilgrims might visit the Throne at any time,
but on the shortest day of the year larger pilgrimages, including villagers
from as far away as 20 miles, descend on the caverns wearing skull masks
and swinging ritual flails made of ox bones and horse hair to celebrate the
cthonic god's birth.
Recently, small bands of visiting pilgrims have fallen victim to a pack of
1d3+1 mantari who have come up from lower portions of the underworld
and made the Throne's cavern their hunting ground. They lurk in the
upper shelves of the cavern, descending while pilgrims are prostrate in
front of the throne. Their shelf is littered with bones and the belongings
of the pilgrims - a three pound ingot of silver (worth 30 sp), a 5 lb ingot
of zinc (worth 4 sp), a large rock crystal worth 90 gp, a bronze goblet in
the shape of a ram's head (worth 2 gp), a brass waist chain (worth 115 gp),
210 sp and 11 gp as well as shredded clothing and five staves.

Mantidrake
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9+2
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d8), 6 tail spikes (1d6)
Special: breath weapon, spikes
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Saving Throw: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A mantidrake is a cross between a dragon and a manticore. A typical
mantidrake is about 10 to 12 feet long and weighs about 1,100 to 1,300
pounds. Its draconic head is scaled and is the same color as its dragon
parent. A mantidrake's breath weapon depends on its dragon heritage.
Regardless of its type, a mantidrake's breath weapon is usable once
every 1d4 rounds, deals 5d8 points of damage, and allows a save for half
damage: black, 60-foot line of acid; blue, 60-foot line of lightning; green,
30-foot cone of gas; red, 30-foot cone of fire; and white, 30-foot cone of
cold). A mantidrake has 24 iron spikes on its tail. It can hurl up to 6 of the
spikes per round, to a maximum range of 180 feet.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Petrified Forest of Drevjen
Many scholars speculate about the origin of the Petrified Forest of
Drevjen, but none has found the reason for the ancient cursed forest.
Animal life is scarce at best in the forest, but all plant life has been turned
to stone. No new living plants grow normally within its boundaries. Plants
and plant-like creatures brought into the woods turn to stone within 24
hours. The crunch of brittle stone leaves and grass sounds with every step.
The trees and brush in outlying areas of the forest have few remaining
leaves, but deeper into the forest the stone trees remain pristine with their
canopies filtering out almost all sunlight. The result is a vast cave-like
room with only occasional pinpoints of light gleaming through. Damage
done to the petrified forest seems to regenerate over time, as if the plants
continue to thrive despite their current state. What horrors lie deep within
the forest are unknown to all but the bravest adventurers.
A pair of mated mantidrakes nests high in the massive petrified tress
on the outside edge of the Dravjen woods. The nest is built high in a
stone snag made from rock branches and leaves. The mantidrakes guard
a clutch of their eggs and fiercely protect their territory. The nest holds
a mythical horn of blasting rumored to have incredibly destructive sonic
powers.

Snake, Marble
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Whistle
Move: 9/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

The marble snake has whitish-gray scales, translucent in places where
its underlying veins can be seen. The snake's head is long and has a large
lion-like mane of golden fur. Two long sharp fangs protrude from its
mouth. Its multi-faceted eyes are red. A typical marble snake is 10 feet
long and can grow to a length of 20 feet.
Unlike normal snakes, it adapts very well to its environment, hence
it can be found just about anywhere, though underground encounters
are rare. The marble snake prefers sunlight and warmth to the cold and
darkness of dungeons and caverns and most often makes its lair in high,
sunny altitudes.
Typically an encounter is with a single marble snake. In instances where
more than one is encountered, they will a mated pair and young. A female
marble snake is usually only encountered during mating season (when
she lays 1d10 eggs). Marble snake eggs are milky-white with gray-brown
flecks. An egg can fetch up to 5 gp on the open market.
A marble snake can whistle, gaining the attention of any creature within
50 feet that hears it. All creatures (other than marble snakes) with the
area must succeed on a saving throw or become entranced. An entranced
victim walks toward the marble snake, taking the most direct route
available. If the path leads into a dangerous area, that creature gets a
second saving throw. The effect continues for as long as the marble snake
whistles and for 1 round thereafter. An entranced victim is effectively
dazed, and cannot attack, but can defend itself. If an entranced opponent
is attacked, the effect is immediately broken.

Credit: The Marble Snake originally appeared in the First Edition module B3
Palace of the Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used
by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by Jean Wells.

Aulos Snake Trial
A winding lane that descends from the south gate of a small town
has been nicknamed Fear Street by the citizens, for it leads past an old
colonial cemetery on its way to the lake. The cemetery is about a 500 feet
long and 100 feet wide and runs along the lane. A low wall of white stones
surrounds the cemetary, with two bronze gates allowing entrance - one on
the north end of the cemetary, the other on the south end.
The stones in the cemetary date from the early days of settlement in
the region, and many names are recognizable as belonging to the leading
citizens of the town. On a few occaisions people have claimed to see a
thin man sitting atop a marble slab playing an aulos (a double piped wind
instrument) in the middle of the night.
The man, his face hidden by a black cloak, is the court jester of the
town's duke, a cruel, paranoid man who has established a secret court
in his family crypt. Enemies (or perceived enemies) are tried here and
sentenced to death. The bodies are fed to a pack of 1d3+1 marble snakes
that reside in the deep recesses of the crypt and sometimes wander the
cemetary, hunting rats and other small game. The snakes are lulled into
a dreamless sleep by the music of the aulos (and perhaps by other deep,
wind instruments).
There is a 1 in 20 chance that court will be in session, and the court
jester present, when adventurers pass by the cemetary one night. If they
investigate, the jester will skulk away (4 in 6 chance of slipping away
unseen in the darkness if adventurers do not declare themselves to be
watching him intently) and head to the crypt, for which he has a key. The
crypt is a small building of marble blocks barred by brass gates. Within,
there are two sarcophagi, one of which opens to reveal a narrow staircase
down to a larger crypt stacked with wrapped corpses on shelves. The
floor of this area is cleared save for an iron chair equipped with manacles.
The duke and his fellow hooded judges stand about the accused, hurling
accusations and torturing confessions out of them with burning brands.
They won’t be happy to see intruders. If the jester is present, he can
summon the marble snakes to attack.

Mawler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Constrict, mimic shape, radiate magic, vorpal bite
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A mawler's natural form is that of a small blob of fleshy stuff
approximately 2 feet across. Mawlers are rarely ever seen in their natural
form, however, as they almost always take the shape of an article of
clothing. A mawler can alter its texture, color and shape to match such
substances as leather and metal. A single mawler usually takes on the
form of a single article of clothing, such as a hat, helmet, scarf, codpiece
or belt. A pair of these creatures encountered together can take the shape
of a pair of boots or a pair of gloves. A mawler radiates as magic, which
often lures victims to it who detect magic on the item the mawler is
mimicking. When an unsuspecting person dons the mawler, it attacks
with its bite. If a mawler hits, it automatically constricts for 1d4 points of
damage in the next round. If a mawler rolls a natural 20 on its bite attack,
it severs whatever appendage is within it at the time (a leg or hand, for
example).

The Clothes Take the Man
A broken wall is all that remains of the Castrano Shrine.
Wooden dowel rods are pushed in to the granite blocks, and
each holds a piece of perfectly preserved clothing. The pegs
are enchanted to keep cloth from disintegrating. Flowering
plants climb the wall, but leave the clothes untouched. Ants
and other insects never go near the cloth. Hanging from the
pegs are a clean forest-green cloak, two loincloths, a pair of
gloves and a toga. The pegs lose their magic if pulled from
the wall.
The cloak and gloves belonged to a magic-user chased from
the ruins by wild boars. One plain loincloth and the toga were
left by a monk killed when the bath house collapsed during the
massive quake that destroyed the shrine. The second loincloth is
a mawler clinging to the wall peg. It appears to be woven from an
expensive, shimmering gold weave.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.


Memory Child
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: Mind drain (1d6)
Special: Mind flood
Move: 12
Saving Throw: 8
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A memory child is an otherworldly being whose sole purpose is the
collecting of memories. A memory child looks exactly like an ordinary
child (male or female) about 7 or 8 years old. Regardless of its actual age,
a memory child never seems to grow up or grow old. A memory child can
absorb an opponent's thoughts and memories by touch. Draining memories
is painful and does 1d6 points of damage to the victim. Alternatively
the touch of a memory child can flood the opponent's mind with every
single thought the child has ever collected from those that have come
into contact with it. This effect overloads the opponent's brain, dazing it
for 1d6+2 rounds and confusing it for 1 hour (treat as a confusion spell).
A successful save negates the stunning effect and reduces the confusion
effect to 1 minute. A memory child can use ESP at will.

The Daedalean Labyrinth
A fierce lightning storm envelops the top of a cragged stone mountain.
The terrifying Daedalean Labyrinth is carved into its granite face. Arcs
of lightning flash across the sky from billowing cloud to billowing cloud.
The lightning is drawn to flying creatures but does not seem to strike
within the maze.
The maze winds its way around the foundation of the mountain and
eventually up the side before disappearing into the dark clouds. There are
four entrances into the maze, one from each cardinal direction. The maze
walls are 15 feet high and have no ceiling. Any flight above the walls
draws the lightning bolts.
Memory children watch over the first section of the labyrinth. These
beings steal the memories of anyone in the maze so they forget their
current location and the direction to the entrances. No living creatures
have ever exited the maze the same way they entered.
The memory children frolic and play in the entrances, but take the hands
of anyone entering the maze as if to guide them through the twists and
turns. They always appear friendly and helpful but do their best to mislead
wanderers until they can steal their memories. The Daedalean Labyrinth
holds many secrets and monsters. It is told that those lost within the maze
over the centuries have formed a nomadic community wandering through
the walls seeking a way out. Even the wisest of sages can only guess what
lies at the end of the maze or why it was created.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Memory Moss
Memory moss appears as a 1-foot square patch of black moss. It
grows in temperate or warm climates and is sometimes encountered
in subterranean realms (though not often). Memory moss cannot abide
the cold or the arid clime of the desert and is never encountered in such
environments.
When a living creature moves within 60 feet of a patch of memory moss,
it attacks by attempting to steal that creature's memories. It can target a
single creature each round. A targeted creature must succeed on a saving
throw or lose all memories from the last 24 hours. This is particularly
nasty to spellcasters, who lose all spells prepared within the last 24 hours.
Once a memory moss steals a creature's memories, it sinks back
down and does not attack again for one day. Any creature who loses its
memories to the memory moss acts as if affected by a confusion spell for
the next 1d4 hours. Lost memories can be regained by eating the memory
moss that absorbed them. Doing so requires a saving throw, with failure
resulting in the creature being nauseated for 1d6 minutes and suffering
2d4 points of damage.
A creature that eats the memory moss temporarily gains the memories
currently stored therein (even if they are not the creature's own memories).
Such creatures can even cast spells if the memory moss has stolen these
from a spellcasting creature. Creatures eating the memory moss to regain
their own lost memories do not lose them after 24 hours. Fire and cold
kills a single patch of memory moss.
When first encountered, there is a 25% chance that the memory moss
has eaten within the last day and does not attack by stealing memories. In
such a case, the moss contains 2d4 spells determined randomly. When a
living creature moves within 60 feet of a sated memory moss, it assumes
a vaguely humanoid form and casts the stolen spells at its targets.

I Forgot, What?
An old oak forest, thick with moss and riddled with fungus, slopes every
downward toward a gravel-filled gully. The gully shows signs of both
infrequent campfires and flooding. Growing near the site of the campfires,
there is a thick patch of black moss. The patch of memory moss grows
in and around a number of skull-sized stones and does not give itself
away during the day, waiting for a band of adventurers to settle in to
camp. Once people have fallen into a slumber, the memory moss strikes
at anyone left awake, stealing away their memories and sending them
wandering aimlessly into he woods, where the local wolves finish them
off.

Credit: The Memory Moss originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Mephit, Lightning
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d2 + 1d4 electricity)
Special: breath weapon, immune to electricity, summon
mephit
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Saving Throw: 16
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A lightning mephit is a winged imp about 4 feet tall and weighs about
1 pound. It breathes a 15-foot cone of lightning (1d8 electricity, save for
half). Once per day it can call down a bolt of lightning for 2d6 points of
damage. A successful save halves the damage. Once per day, a lightning
mephit can attempt to summon another lightning mephit with a 25%
chance of success.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Unnatural
A lightning-blasted tree is split in two, revealing a two-handed sword
embedded in the burnt stump. It appears as if the tree grew around the
sword until a lightning bolt freed it from its living prison. A web of
camouflaged metal cords lies buried under the leaves and grass around
the shattered stump. Two lightning mephitis hide within the split halves
of the tree. Anyone standing on the metal cords when the lightning
mephits strike takes an extra 1d6 points of damage as the metal conducts
electricity around them.
Summoned by a magic-user, they have guarded the tree for centuries,
never knowing that the tree contained a sword. The sword may have
any number of abilities as decided by the Game Referee, but some ideas
include absorbing electrical damage and turning it into healing magic for
the wielder or improving the wielder's armor class by –1[+1] as it turns
the bearer's skin as hard as bark.

Mephit, Smoke
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d2)
Special: breath weapon, immune to fire, summon mephit
Move: 12/18 (flying)
Saving Throw: 16
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A smoke mephit is a winged imp about 4 feet tall and weighs about 1
pound. It breathes a 15-foot cone of hot soot (1d4 points of fire damage,
save for half). Living creatures that fail their saves are tormented by
burning eyes that impose a –2 to-hit penalty for 3 rounds. Once per day,
the mephit can create a downpour of white-hot embers in a 20-foot radius
that causes 2d6 points of fire damage to creature in the area. A successful
save halves the damage. Once per day, a smoke mephit can attempt to
summon another smoke mephit with a 25% chance of success.

Churning Oil
A large metal and canvas wind fan turns atop a narrow 60-foot tower.
An iron ladder attached to the side of the tower leads to the only entrance
at the top. Metal pipes protrude from the tower walls and pump crude
oil into a series of iron barrel-like contraptions. Metal smokestacks emit
plumes of thick smog into the air, the black clouds dumping an oily ash
over the land.
Four smoke mephits burn off waste sludge inside the contraption to
produce functional oil. The ground around the tower is a mess of mud,
oil and unidentifiable sludge. Two ogres and six orcs fill barrels of oil
from the machine and load the containers onto wagons. Twelve wagons
sit nearby, each filled with barrels of oil. Six more wagons hold empty
barrels. A herd of mistreated oxen suffer in a corral near the loaded
wagons.
Any flame or flame-based spell near the tower ignite the land around the
structure in a furious blaze as the oil-soaked ground ignites (6d6 points
of damage, save for half). An enterprising magic-user named Oggsdul
completes paperwork and tends to the pump controls in the top of the
tower. He doesn’t care for the safety of his minions; he can always hire
more.

OGGSDUL (9th-level magic-user): HD 9; HP 19; AC 9[10];
Atk 1 dagger (1d4); Move 12; Save 7; CL/XP 9/1,100;
Special: Spells: 1—charm person, light, magic missile,
shield; 2—invisibility, levitate, web; 3—fireball, haste, hold
person; 4—confusion, wall of fire; 5—transmute mud to rock;
Equipment: wand of pyrotechnics (8 charges)

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Midnight Peddler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Touch (death chill)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Death chill, divination, plane shift
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

The midnight peddler appears as a normal human, cloaked in a long gray
hooded robe. A long protruding, sharp jaw can be seen under the hood.
He wanders city streets and is normally only encountered on fog-covered
nights. He is first detected by the audible squeaking of the cart he pushes,
the sound growing louder as he draws closer. The midnight peddler
moves with a slow gait as he pushes his wooden cart. The contents of his
cart vary each time he visits the Material Plane, but at any given time, he
has available any item listed in the equipment section with a value of 50
gp or less. The midnight peddler speaks the common tongue.
The touch of the midnight peddler drains 1d4 levels to a living creature.
The peddler provides advice and answers correctly any one question
asked of him by any creature who buys something from his cart.
The midnight peddler can plane shift to any inner or outer plane as a
move action. His cart (and any non-living matter contained therein) shifts
with him. This ability otherwise functions as the spell of the same name.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Travelling Peddlers Are Always Sinister
The Worshipful Company of Augurs, Prophets and Prognosticators has
run into a problem. Each night, at midnight precisely, a strange cart pulled
by a man in a hooded cloak appears beneath the covered lane that runs
between the home of the master armorer and the School for Impressionable
Maidens. The peddler proceeds down the lane, past the old fountain and
into a deadend alley, where he disappears in the shadows. The origins of
the peddler are unknown, but what the fortune tellers of the city know is
that he's cutting seriously into their business. Where people once visited
their salons and parlors and paid well to learn of their future, they now
creep out of their homes at midnight to buy a bauble from the peddler and
have a single question answered.
In response to this crisis, the assembled diviners are seeking the services
of foreign ne’er-do-wells to put a bloody end to the midnight peddler's
poaching of their suckers. They are offering a 2,000 gp reward for any
who can bring them proof of his end. The local assassins have turned
down their contract, for reasons they will not share, and this alone has
caused the soothsayers to wonder if they aren’t making a miscalculation.

Mihstu
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  4 tentacles (1d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Constitution damage, engulf, +1 or better weapon
to hit, immunity to electricity, resistance to missile attacks,
magic resistance (15%), susceptible to cold
Move: 9/9 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

Mihstus are semi-solid creatures from the Elemental Plane of Air.
They are found in cool, damp, dark areas such as ruins, dungeons, and
underground caves and caverns. The mihstu can shape its body at will and
almost always appears on the Material Plane as a cloud of swirling vapor.
It can seep through small cracks and openings.

When threatened, a mihstu forms four tentacles from its body. Each
tentacle ends in a razor-sharp, barb-like talon. A mihstu can try to wrap
a creature in its body as an attack that ignores the victim's armor bonus
to Armor Class. Even while engulfing a victim a mihstu can still use its
tentacles to strike at other targets. A mihstu deals 1d2 points of constitution
damage to an engulfed opponent each round the hold is maintained.
Ranged attacks (including magic missile) used against a mihstu have
a 50% miss chance. Cold-based attacks and effects deal no damage to a
mihstu, but stun it. If the cold-based effect allows a saving throw and the
mihstu succeeds on its save, it ignores the stun effect. If it fails its save, or
if the effect doesn’t allow a save, the mihstu is stunned for 1d4+2 rounds.

Credit: The Mihstu originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Clinging to a Cloud
In a landscape of green, rolling hills and pleasant, balmy breezes,
there is an ancient stone wall. The wall is all that remains of an ancient
temple. It stands about 20 feet tall and is 45 feet long. Three large, arched
windows pierce the wall, spaced about 10 feet apart from one another.
Each of the windows is 6 feet tall and 4-1/2 feet wide.
The center window in the wall is a portal into the Elemental Plane of
Air. A strong wind blows through the window at all times, and observers
might (1 in 20 chance per day) see elemental air creatures pass through it
into the mortal realms.
The window is easy enough to enter - one need only climb up to it and
step inside. Once they do, they will find themselves in a 100-foot long
tunnel of dark gray stone. The walls of the tunnel are slick and periodic
bursts of lightning arc across them.
The guardian of the tunnel, a bound mihstu, can be found at its midpoint.
The guardian permits no non-native of the Elemental Plane of Air to pass
through the tunnel alive. Those who reach the other side find themselves
looking out at an endless sky of rose and amber hues.

Mimi
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2 hp
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 dagger (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Spell-like abilities
Move: 3/18 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

A mimi resembles a 1-foot-tall elf with small, bee-like wings, silver hair,
milk white skin, and icy blue eyes. A mimi dresses in brightly colored
clothing, preferring garments of blue, silver, or green. Mimis avoid
combat, but blast foes with a cone of cold (once per day) if disturbed.
They turn invisible (at will) and flee if threatened.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Snow Going
The mountain passes are snowbound, with man-sized drifts covering
the ground and ice coating the rocky surfaces. Heavy flakes of snow
continue to fall. Tree limbs sag under a thick blanket of ice. In the middle
of the path leading up the next hill, a snowman stands facing downhill. It
has two coal eyes, a carrot nose and what appear to be five small rubies
forming a mouth. Two long branches are its arms. The cliffs rise slightly
around the pass, leaving the snowman standing in shadows. When PCs
get close enough, the snowman's head turns and it says, “10 gold to pass.”
Six mimis live in the mountains and delight in tormenting travelers. The
snowman is made of real snow, with a mimi crouched in the head to turn
it and speak.
If PCs don’t pay the toll, the hidden mimis pelt PCs with snowballs
from the high ridges and roll a 10-foot-diameter snowball down the hill
toward them. The snowball picks up more snow on its descent, so it is 15
feet wide by the time it smashes into the snowman and the PCs. It does
no damage, but PCs who fail a save are smashed into the snowball as it
continues to roll down the hillside. They are nauseated by the sickening
ride (save avoids).
The mimis continue with their fun for as long as possible, not harming
PCs as long as they are good sports and play along. If the snowball fight
turns serious, the mimis use their cone of cold ability and escape.

Mire Brute
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 fists (3d6)
Special: Disgorge vermin, disease, impale, magic weapon
required to hit, immune to fire
Move: 9/20 (swim)
Saving Throw: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

Mire brutes, when dormant, appear as large stretches of mud bristling
with wooden stakes. Once per day a mire brute can vomit forth a spray of
fetid water to a range of 30 feet. The spray contains small biting insects
and worms. Treat these vermin as a creeping doom spell. A mire brute can
try to impale smaller opponents. An impaled opponent immediately takes
4d6 points of damage and is stuck on the stakes jutting from the mire
brute's body. The stakes protruding from a mire brute's body are filthy
and diseased. A saving throw is allowed (versus poison). The effects of
the disease are decided by the Game Referee.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Tree People of Eanca
High in the mountains lies a fen nestled among giant redwoods. The
redwoods thrive in the geothermal warmth in an unusual mountain
swamp. The barbaric people of the mountains built their settlement high
up in the redwoods above the swamp. The Tree People use the swamp, the
trees and the swamp's creatures as natural defenses against their enemies.
They are a simple, yet fierce and territorial people.
The Tree People worship a mire brute that resides in the swamp below
their temple in the trees. The temple consists of a hole in a wooden
platform through which they drop sacrifices to the mire brute “god.”
Their sacrifices consist of slaves and captives taken from neighboring
tribes. The bodies (adorned with the best fineries available to the Tree
People) lie impaled upon the submerged mire brute's back.

Common Mite
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack: Club (1d4) and bite (1d3)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: None
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 1/15

Mites are thought to be distant relatives of the goblins. Mites live their
lives deep under the surface of the earth and are never encountered on the
surface world. While sunlight does not harm a mite, it prefers the darkness
and dampness of its underground realm.

Common mites speak their own language of garbled twittering, though some can
speak the language of goblins. Pesties generally prefer not to communicate
with others (even those of their own race) except through body language and
hand signals. It is unknown whether pesties simply cannot or choose not to
speak.

Trickery and surprise are the forte of the mite. They avoid direct melee with
opponents, preferring to attack from ambush. Often, the first telltale signs
that mites may be nearby is the plethora of traps, snares, and tripwires
encountered. Mites prefer to attack those they feel they can overpower or
dispose of quickly. Extremely tough or powerful opponents are ignored and left
to pass through unabated or swarmed by a massive number of mites. Though
considered unintelligent and stupid by other races, there is a sort of weird
cooperation and strategy to mite tactics (that only mites can understand).

A typical mite ambush has the creatures digging narrow tunnels that parallel
a dungeon's corridors. When a foe traverses these corridors, the mites burst
from the walls and tunnels and strike quickly with their daggers. Opponents
are rarely killed, but any knocked unconscious are relieved of coins, weapons,
or any other item of value. If forced into melee, mites seek escape at the
first possible opportunity. Mites attack with clubs and a bite in combat,
while pesties prefer to utilize hit-and-run tactics to keep opponents
off-balance.

Credit: The Mite and Pestie originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and are used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Skeeter Green, based on original
material by Ian Livingstone and Mark Barnes.

Pestie Mite
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Dagger (1d3)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 1/15

Common mites speak their own language of garbled twittering, though some can
speak the language of goblins. Pesties generally prefer not to communicate
with others (even those of their own race) except through body language and
hand signals. It is unknown whether pesties simply cannot or choose not to
speak.

A typical mite ambush has the creatures digging narrow tunnels that parallel
a dungeon's corridors. When a foe traverses these corridors, the mites burst
from the walls and tunnels and strike quickly with their daggers. Opponents
are rarely killed, but any knocked unconscious are relieved of coins, weapons,
or any other item of value. If forced into melee, mites seek escape at the
first possible opportunity. Mites attack with clubs and a bite in combat,
while pesties prefer to utilize hit-and-run tactics to keep opponents
off-balance.

Mites make their homes underground in deep, dark dungeons and caverns where
they survive by stealing from those unfortunate enough to wander near their
lair. A mite lair is often a large central room or cavern from which many
small and winding tunnels lead. A mite lair is a filthy place littered with
garbage and refuse. Cleanliness and sanitation are virtually unknown in a mite
community. Pesties often are found working with or lairing with goblins or
(more usually) common mites.  The trapmaking skills of the mite complement the
pestie's adeptness at speed and hit-and-run tactics. Mite young are almost
never encountered, but a typical lair contains a number of noncombatant young
equal to the number of adult mites.

Credit: The Mite and Pestie originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and are used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Skeeter Green, based on original
material by Ian Livingstone and Mark Barnes.

Mitey Rift to Hell
A mob of 6d4 common mites is making its way through a triangular
tunnel clad in porphyry, carrying their loot in leather sacks. If confronted,
they will seemingly disappear into the walls. The mites actually use doors
set sideways to reality, doors one can only find if they have fey blood or a
wisdom score of 18. Two or three of the mites will make a show of fleeing
down the tunnel and into a large chamber.

As one exits the tunnel, they will feel themselves hurled against the far wall
of the chamber, suffering 2d6 points of falling damage. After they recover
their senses, they will realize they are on the floor of the chamber, the
tunnel through which they entered now being a seemingly solid, black triangle
on the ceiling. Four other triangles around it form a pentagram lined in gold.

The chamber is about 50 feet in diameter and 20 feet tall. The walls are
swathed in curtains of red velvet. The curtains hide thirteen barred circular
caches, each about 3 feet in diameter and 2 feet deep. A polished stone is set
in the back of each cache. The stones are of various types, but each is
a sphere 4 inches in diameter, highly polished and worth about
500 gp. The mites the adventurers chased into the room are nowhere to be seen.

If a gem is pried from the wall, one will discover a powerful void behind it.
This void will begin sucking the air and any small object not secured into it.
The person who pried the gem must pass a saving throw or have their hand and
arm sucked into the hole and suffer 1d6 points of damage from the pressure and
cold. When a person has lost 25% of their total normal hp from this
damage, their arm will be left withered and useless.

The sucking of the void will begin to open a rift in the center of the
chamber. The rift will appear as a black, crackling energy that gradually
expands to fill an area roughly the same shape as the pentagram on the ceiling
and extending from floor to ceiling. This process should take 15 rounds, but
multiple void holes will quicken the rate of growth (i.e. 2 holes will cause
the rift to grow in 8 rounds, 3 holes in 5 rounds, and so on). Once the rift
is complete, a random demon or devil will emerge from it into the room and
attend its petitioners as it sees fit. The void holes can be plugged with the
gems or with a large enough object at least as strong as steel.

Mongrelman
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Fists (1d4) or club (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Sound imitation, surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Mongrelmen are hideous creatures seemingly pieced together from parts of other
monsters as some sort of vile joke or blight on humanity. Though not
inherently evil, mongrelmen are shunned from society because of their
appearance. They make their homes far from civilization, and those few
encountered in settled areas are usually slaves or servants of the local
humanoid races. Mongrelmen that must travel among other races take precautions
so as not to reveal their true identities, using cloaks, capes, and the like
to hide their forms. Mongrelman society is a collection of close-knit tribes,
each with its own leader. Mongrelmen never fight against other mongrelmen,
preferring to live peaceably with others of their kind, for all mongrelmen
know they are shunned by outsiders and must stick together if their race is to
survive. Mongrelmen stand about 6 feet tall. The average lifespan of
a mongrelman is 35 years. Mongrelmen speak their own guttural language.

Mongrelmen can imitate sounds made by any creature they have previously
encountered, including monsters with special vocal attacks.  They cannot,
however, mimic the special vocal attack powers or damage dealt by such
attacks. A successful listen check made by a listener detects the falsehood.

Mongrelmen as Characters Mongrelman characters enjoy a +1 bonus to strength
and constitution scores at character creation, but suffer a -3 penalty to
their charisma score. These adjustments cannot increase a starting ability
score above 18 or lower a starting ability score below 3. Mongrelmen can see
in the dark as well as elves and retain their ability to imitate sounds.
Mongrelmen can advance in levels as fighters (up to 6th level, or 7th level
with a strength score of 13+) or thieves (up to 8th level, or 9th level with
a dexterity of 13+).

Randomly Generating a Mongrelman Mongrelmen are a mixture of many different
creatures, and no two mongrelmen ever look alike. The table below can be used
to generate the appearance of any given mongrelman.

Roll one time for each of the following areas of a mongrelman: left side of
head (includes ear and eye); right side of head (includes ear and eye); torso;
right arm; left arm; right leg and left leg.

===== ==========================================================================
d20   Random Mongrelman Generation
===== ==========================================================================
1     Gnoll
2     Goblin
3     Hobgoblin
4     Human
5     Kobold
6     Merfolk
7     Locathah
8     Sahuagin
9     Dwarf
10    Elf
11    Gnome
12    Halfling
13    Orc or ogre
14    Troglodyte
15    Crabman
16    Bugbear
17    Minotaur
18    Flind
19    Lizardfolk
20    Missing body part (Use common sense on this one.  Obviously, a mongrelman cannot be missing part of its torso.)
===== ==========================================================================

Description of Body Parts A mongrelman gains abilities in addition to the ones noted in the
stat block above based on the actual body parts that make up that
mongrelman. Below are descriptions of the body parts and additional
abilities gained.

Gnoll: Eye: See in darkness and spot concealed doors on roll of 1-2 on 1d6. Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6. Arm: +1 melee damage using that arm.

Goblin: Eye: See in darkness and spot concealed doors on roll of 1-2 on 1d6. Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6. Arm: -1 melee damage using that arm.

Hobgoblin: Eye: See in darkness and spot concealed doors on roll of 1-2 on 1d6. Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6.

Human: No additional abilities.

Kobold: Eye: See in darkness, spot concealed doors on 1-2 on 1d6, sensitive to light. Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6. Arm: -1 melee damage using that arm.

Merfolk: Eye: See in darkness and spot concealed doors on roll of 1-2 on 1d6. Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6. Head: If entire head is merfolk, the mongrelman can breathe water and air equally. Leg: Leg is actually a fin or flipper and the mongrelman moves at one-half speed while on land. Torso: Mongrelman has a land movement rate of 3, but can swim at a movement rate of 18.

Locathah: Eye: See in darkness and spot concealed doors on roll of 1-2 on 1d6. Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6. Head: If entire head is locathah, the mongrelman can breathe water and air equally.

Sahuagin: Eye: See in darkness and spot concealed doors on roll of 1-2 on 1d6 and light blindness. Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6. Arm: +1 melee damage using that arm. Head: If entire head is sahuagin, the mongrelman can breathe water and air equally.

Dwarf: Eye: See in darkness. Head: If entire head is dwarven, the mongrelman gains the dwarf's ability to notice unusual stonework.  Torso: +1 to saves against poison.

Elf: Eye: See in darkness and spot concealed doors on roll of 1-2 on 1d6 and light blindness. Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6. Head: If entire head is elven, the mongrelman gains a +1 bonus to saves against charm and sleep.

Gnome: Eye: See in darkness. Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6.  Head: If entire head is gnome, the mongrelman gains a +1 bonus to saves against illusions.

Halfling: Ear: Listen at doors on 1-2 on 1d6. Arm: -1 melee damage using that arm. Torso: Mongrelman is small.

Orc or ogre: Eye: See in darkness and light sensitivity. Arm: +1 melee damage using that arm (orc) or +2 melee damage using that arm (ogre).

Troglodyte: Eye: See in darkness. Torso: Gains the stench ability and surprises on 1-2 on 1d6 by changing its skin color.

Crabman: Eye: See in darkness. Arm: +2 melee damage using that arm. Hand: hand is actually a large pincer like that of the crabman; gains claw attack that deals 1d6 damage.

Bugbear: Eye: See in darkness. Arm: +1 melee damage using that arm.

Minotaur: Eye: See in darkness and spot concealed door on 1-2 on 1d6. Ear: Listen at door on 1-2 on 1d6. Arm: +2 melee damage using that arm. Head: Gore attack for 1d4 damage; if both sides of a mongrelman's head are minotaur, the gore damage increases to 1d6.

Flind: Eye: See in darkness and spot concealed door on 1-2 on 1d6.  Ear: Listen at door on 1-2 on 1d6. Arm: +1 melee damage using that arm.

Lizardfolk: Arm: +1 melee damage using that arm. Hand: Gains claw attack that deals 1d3 damage. Head: Gains bite attack that deals 1d3 damage. Torso: Gains a lizardfolk's tail and swim speed.

Credit: The Mongrelman originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Mongrelman Melancholy
You come upon a conclave of 1d10 x 10 mongrelmen living in a series
of sea caves. The mongrelmen are preparing a feast (rather meager, if truth
be told), though the celebration seems rather somber. The mongrelmen
are quiet, simpering creatures, melancholic and not eager to entertain
visitors, though they will not resist the intrusion of others into their home.
The leader of the mongrelmen will explain that they have little to offer
visitors, and that it is probably safer if they leave, for in the morning they
expect the arrival of the red raiders.
The red raiders are pirates who sail in a red galley with black sails. At
each full moon they sail the coast, visiting the mongrelmen and taking a
tribute of seven slaves. The mongrelman slaves are put to work as rowers
and treated no better than machines. The red raiders make no attempt to
keep them alive any longer than they must.
The leader of the mongrelmen is Tovos, a 6th level thief. Tovos is, like
all mongrelmen, a weird amalgam of creatures. The left side of its head
looks like that of a flind, while the right is that of a sahuagin. Tovos’ left
arm is that of a crabman, the right is that of a goblin. He has the torso of a
halfling, the right leg of a kobold and the left leg of a bugbear.
The leader of the red raiders, berserkers all of them, is called Yazima.
Yazima is a tall, copper-skinned woman with orange-red hair and crystal
blue eyes. She is an 8th level fighter who wears leather armor adorned
with burnished bronze rings and carries a red shield and a heavy scimitar.

Moon Dog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attack:  Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 7
Special: Bay, shadow weave, spells, +1 or better weapon to
hit, immunity to fear, lick, plane shift, magic resistance (30%)
Move: 18/12 (bipedal)
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2900

The moon dog is a large wolfhound from the outer planes (believed
to have its origins on the plane of Elysium). Moon dogs often enter the
Material Plane when chaos has grown to an immeasurable level in an
area. Otherwise, they are found in the employ of deities, solars, planetars,
and the most powerful devas.
Moondogs forepaws are prehensile and resemble human hands. Though
moon dogs can move on two legs in a bipedal fashion, most do not do so,
preferring the speed and grace they gain by moving on all fours. They
have grayish-black fur and golden eyes.
A moon dog can produce one of the following effects when it howls or
barks.
Fear: All evil creatures within 80 feet must make a successful saving
throw or be affected as by a fear spell.
Dispel Evil: This effect works like the spell, and affects one evil creature
within 80 feet.
Dismissal: This effect forces an extraplanar creature to pass a saving
throw or be sent back to its home plane.
The following abilities are always active on the moon dog: Detect evil,
detect magic, and detect invisibility. They can cast mirror image three
times per day and darkness, invisibility, light and obscuring mist once per
day. A moon dog can also dispel magic once per day, but doing so forces
it back to its plane of origin.
When in shadows, a moon dog can move in such a way as to affect
evil creatures within 60 feet as though by a hypnotic pattern. Any lawful
creature in the area of the shadow weave will be affected as though by
protection from evil. The moon dog cannot use its shadow weave and
attack, and the moon dog must concentrate to maintain it.
By licking a person's wounds, a moon dog may use one of the following
abilities: cure disease, cure light wounds or remove disease. Each is
usable at will by the moon dog, but only once per day per recipient.
A moon dog can enter the Ethereal Plane, Astral Plane, or Material
Plane.

Guardian Angel Hound
Stories abound in the farm village about the wolfhound who watches
over the people. For several moons, the strange dog has been seen in
glimpses moving through the woods around the old reservoir or in
silhouette at night, baying at the moon. On at least three occaisions it
has been credited with saving a person's life. The first time was when
it rescued a child from drowning in the reservoir. It also chased away
two brigands who threatened old Jed on the imperial road as he took his
turnips to market and then again when he pulled three maidens out of a
burning barn.
In all three cases, the moon dog, for a moon dog it is, was countering
the actions of a band of 3d6 x 10 aquatic hobgoblins that has taken
up residence in the murky waters of the old reservoir. The hobgoblins
were chased from their old lair by a gang of fresh water trolls, and were
fortunate to discover the reservoir a few miles up stream.
The leader of the hobgoblins has the abilities of a 2nd level magic-user
and 3rd level cleric of the “Creeping Crud”, an ooze god favored by the
wicked water fey of the region. The moon dog was dispatched by the
deva Soniznt, patron of the village's church, to protect the village until
adventurers could be “led” to the village.
Encounters with the hobgoblins occur on a roll of 1-4 on 1d6. An
encounter will usually be with 1d6+6 hobgoblins, for the creatures are
beginning to patrol in force. In the event of an attack, the moon dog will
make itself known and explain why the adventurers have come to the
village (even if they think they arrived on their own volition).

Credit: The Moon Dog originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Mortuary Cyclone
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 17
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 1 fist (3d6 + level drain)
Special: 50% spell resistance, +2 magic weapons required to
hit, create spawn, desecrating aura, whirlwind
Move: 16
Saving Throw: 3
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 20/5,900

A mortuary cyclone is 5 feet wide at the base, 30 feet wide at the top and
about 40 feet tall tornado composed of grave dirt, bone fragments, and body
parts all swirling around in its whirlwind form. A mortuary cyclone emanates
an aura of desecration within a 50-foot radius centered on its body. Undead
within the area gain a +2 bonus on attack rolls, damage rolls, and saves. Once
every 1d4 rounds, a mortuary cyclone can blast forth a mass of bone fragments,
debris and negative energy in a 30-foot cone. Creatures caught in the cone
take 6d6 points of damage. Creatures that save reduce the damage by half.

Opponents touching or entering the mortuary cyclone (if the cyclone moves into
another creature) might be lifted into the air if they are smaller than the
mortuary cyclone. A creature that comes into contact with the whirlwind takes
3d6 points of damage. It must also succeed on a save or be picked up bodily
and held suspended in the powerful winds, automatically taking 3d6 points of
damage each round thereafter.

Creatures trapped in the whirlwind cannot move except to go where the mortuary
cyclone carries them or to try to escape the whirlwind.  Any living creature
slain by a mortuary cyclone's whirlwind attack or energy drain attack becomes
an undead creature in 1d4 rounds.  Creatures with less than 3 HD return as
a ghoul or ghast; 4-7 HD, a wraith; 8-11 HD, a spectre; and 12+ HD return as
a ghost.

Negative Vortex
The sides of this small mountain have disintegrated, leaving a
sheer cliff wall surrounding the peak. The top of the mountain levels
off to form a quarter-mile-diameter plateau. Identical featureless
obelisks symmetrically surround a solid octagonal tower of black
granite. The outer wall of the tower is covered in petroglyphs and
star charts. Sections of the tower rotate horizontally to align with
the constellations. With careful study, a scholar may determine that
the rotating sections seem to count down to a specific date when the
stars will align. The only physical entrance into the tower's interior lies
buried under 10 feet of earth on the north side of the building. The tower
hosts a multitude of undead in the service of a lich king who rests within.
A mortuary cyclone guards against interlopers to this sacred monument
to undeath. The cyclone issues forth from the top of the tower if a living
being touches the tower.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Mosquito, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4 hp
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 bite (1 point + blood drain)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: blood drain
Move: 6/15 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

Giant mosquitoes are 3 feet long and slender, with dark black bodies.
Silver scales line their thorax, and like other insects, the giant mosquito
is segmented. It has six legs of the same dark color as its body and its
single pair of wings is translucent. The giant mosquito possesses a long,
slender proboscis, the end of which contains its mouth. Females use this
to pierce a living creature's flesh and drink their blood (1d4 hp per
round for 1d6 rounds).

Deadliest Catch
The annual fishing derby of Juloos Loch draws competitors from many
leagues – all hoping to claim the 50 silver scales (normal silver pieces
crafted to be more “fish-like”) for catching the biggest fish. More than
100 fishermen are already on the lake by the time the morning fog parts
and the sun begins to rise.
But it isn’t long before screams drown out the celebration. A fisherman's
boat drifts in, the angler sitting upright but completely drained of blood.
His ashen face is pale and his cheeks and eyes sunken. He holds his
homemade fishing rod in his desiccated hands. Even the fish lying in the
boat are drained of blood.
Last year's tournament angered a druid living on the far side of the lake.
A worshipper of the loathsome insect god Rachiss, the druid vowed to
get his revenge on the fishermen invading his privacy with their annual
contest. The druid raises giant mosquitos in a barn on his property, and
nourishes them with the blood of cattle. He released them just before
dawn to scour the lake in search of “fresh blood.” Ten of the mosquitos
buzz the lake, terrorizing fishermen and draining the blood of those who
can’t get away.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Muckdweller
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (1d3)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Blinding spray
Move: 6/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

The muckdweller is a small, swamp-dwelling bipedal lizard that lives
on a diet of carrion, fresh meat, plants, and insects. It has a long tail that
allows it to swim rapidly through the water or maintain its balance when
standing upright. Muckdwellers sometimes associate with lizardfolk.
Muckdwellers stand about 4 feet tall. They speak their own language of
croaks and hisses, and a rare few speak the language of black dragons.
By filling its mouth with muddy water, a muckdweller can fire a stream
of muddy water in a 10-foot line. A creature hit must succeed on a saving
throw or be blinded for 1d2 rounds. A muckdweller can take a move
action to refill its mouth with muddy water so it can use its spray again.

have happened in the great hall, a sort of no-man's-land.
Over the past three nights, several followers of each claimant have been
killed by some manner of wild animal. This has thrown each side into a
fury of accusations, challenges and bloody (though nonlethal) duels.
The murderers in question are a pack of 1d4+3 muchdwellers that have
been let into the castle from the murky moors by a third party, an 8th level
cleric who serves as an abbot of the death god's monastery. The monk holds
a scroll of protection from reptilians. He plans to provoke the two cardinals
into open war, leaving himself clear to claim the position of high priest.

Last Man Standing Wins
There is an old castle on the moor, ancient and moss covered and
seemingly always surrounded by a gray miasma. The castle is divided
between two rivals, 9th level clerics in service to the temple of the death
god. The high priest of that god has recently passed on, and the cardinals
both expect to be declared the new high priest in a conclave of high
priests of the other deities of the pantheon.
Each of the bitter men has invited his supporters and hangers-on
to a great party to celebrate his expected ascension. The revelers are
sequestered in their own sides of the castle, but several raucous clashes

Credit: The Muckdweller originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Mudbog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: Engulf
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Immune to blunt weapons, engulf, acid
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

uncontrollable violence. From his food to clothing, nearly everything in Tungo's
daily life deals with swine. The field contains several mudbogs. The wild swine
have learned to sense and avoid the deadly oozes, but Tungo regularly feeds the
things pork scraps to ensure their survival. Tungo has adopted a primordial boar
that shares his abode and rarely leaves his side.
Although normally offensive (both in hygiene and personality), Tungo
has learned of an oakman who makes wondrous cakes from pork fat,
asparagus and moss. He desperately wants to try these cakes but does not
want to leave his beloved mud pits.

Mudbogs are slow-moving, pudding-like creatures that are brownish in
color, resembling nothing more than brackish mud. The average mudbog
is roughly 10 feet across and 3 feet deep. Mudbogs dig holes in the swamp
and wait for creatures to blunder into their bodies. A mudbog secretes
a digestive acid that dissolves organic material (leather armor, wooden
clubs, etc.) and deals 1d6 points of damage. Any being that stumbles into
a mudbog is considered engulfed and takes 1d6 points of damage from
the creature's acidic nature automatically in the rounds thereafter.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Pig Pen
Small sulfur springs continually feed into a muddy field. The area reeks
of rotten eggs. A sod hut sits on a small island amid the soupy pasture. A
hollow tree stands next to the hut and serves as a chimney. Sounders of
wild hogs populate the fields, the animals wallowing in the mud, basking
in the sun and licking the salty sulfur.
The abrasive druid Tungo Bramlett lives in the mud hut among the swine.
The burly Tungo contracted Devil Swine disease that turns him into a wereboar.
Easily angered, Tungo quickly transforms into a boar hybrid capable of

Mudman
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  2 slams (1d4) or mud bomb (see text)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Engulf, mud bomb, +1 or better weapon to hit,
mindless, mud pool
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A mudman's natural form is that of a pool of mud about 5 feet in
diameter. In this form, they cannot be discerned from normal mud.
Mud pools are formed where the run-off from alchemical laboratories
mixes with soil. Though not evil, mudmen look with disdain on any who
trespass in their mud pools.

When a living creature enters a mud pool, the mudman forms its
humanoid shape and attacks until the opponent is slain or leaves the mud
pool. A mudman attacks by pummeling a foe with its fists or by hurling
globs of mud. Mudmen are bound to the pool where they are formed.
A mudman attacks by hurling globs of mud at its opponent. These globs
deal no damage and have a range of 30 feet. A successful ranged touch
attack means the mud glob hits the target and solidifies in the same round.
A creature hit by a mud bomb has its movement rate reduced by 3. A
creature whose movement is reduced to 0 is stuck on the ground. A stuck
creature cannot move without making a successful open doors check. A
creature can scrape the mud off, taking one round to scrape it off for every
mud bomb that hit them.

A mudman can hurl itself at any creature within 10 feet. If it succeeds
on a ranged attack, the mudman engulfs the victim's head and upper
body in mud that instantly solidifies and cuts off the victim's air. This
attack destroys the mudman if its hits; otherwise it reverts to its natural
form and must spend one full round reforming. A character that has no
air to breathe can hold her breath for 2 rounds per point of Constitution.
After this period of time, the character suffocates. The mud can be hit
automatically and is destroyed when it takes 6 hp of damage from
a blunt weapon. Each successful attack deals half its damage to the mud
and the other half to the engulfed victim. The mud can be pried off by a
creature with a successful open doors check.

Mudmen are mindless, and thus immune to mind-influencing effects
like charms, suggestions, fear and illusions. Dispel magic acts as a fireball
spell against a mudman, dealing 1d6 points of damage per caster level to
all mudmen in a 30-foot radius (no save). Transmute mud to rock deals
1d8 points of damage per caster level to all mudmen in the area of effect
(save for half).

Credit: The Mudman originally appeared in the First Edition module UK1 Beyond
the Crystal Cave (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and later in the First
Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission. It was called the “Mud-man” in UK1 (note the hyphen).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by David J.
Browne, Tom Kirby, and Graeme Morris.

Mud Pies, Anyone?
What began as a simple magical experiment involving the Elemental
Plane of Water has turned into a nightmare for the grand duke. His
court magician was conjuring over a cauldron when a comet made an
unexpected transit across Aquarius. Water in its pure, elemental form
poured from the cauldron, flooding the tower occupied by the magician
and creating a great, swampy mess around the castle. Worse yet, a pack
of 1d6+6 mudmen now has the castle surrounded, essentially under siege.
The grand duke has lost no fewer than 20 men-at-arms and 5 knights to
the mudmen, his wine cellar is flooded and ruined and the food supply is
running low. He should pay handsomely for assistance, though the crafty
old miser probably will find a way out of showing his gratitude.

Mummy of the Deep
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6+2
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  Slam (1d6 plus curse of the deep)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Curse of the deep, despair, control water,
resistance to fire (50%)
Move: 9/9 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

A mummy of the deep is an undead creature that lairs in the depths of
the sea. It is the result of an evil creature that was buried at sea for its
sins in life. The wickedness permeating the former life has managed
to cling even into unlife and revive the soul as a mummy of the
deep. It appears as a rotting humanoid wrapped in seaweed.
On a slam attack, a victim must pass a saving throw or be
embraced by the mummy. The mummy presses its lips against
an opponent's and regurgitates sea water into the opponent's
lungs. Each round thereafter, for the next 10 rounds, the
victim must make a saving throw or take 1d4 points of
damage that round. Three consecutive successful saves
means the character has coughed up enough water to shake
the effects of this attack and takes no further damage. An
affected creature can take no actions other than to defend
itself in any round it takes damage from this ability. At 0
or less hp, the victim falls unconscious. In the next
round, he drowns. Holding one's breath does not prevent
drowning because water is already in the lungs. A remove
curse halts the damage if applied before the creature
reaches 0 or less hp.
At the mere sight of a mummy of the deep, the viewer
must succeed on a saving throw or be paralyzed with fear
for 1d4 rounds.
Once per day, a mummy of the deep can part water or
lower water.

Beauty is Only Skin Deep
Beneath the waters of the frothy strait that now bears her
name lies the body of the most beautiful woman ever born, now
animated as a mummy of the deep. The creatures of the strait
and some beyond fear her power and obey her commands, bringing
beautiful young men beneath the waves to her. Alas, the young men
do not survive the journey, and the mummy's desire for companionship
is never satisfied.
The mummy of the deep dwells in a castle of white stones, constructed
by her merrow and lacedon servants (she commands 2d4 of the former
and 2d6+6 of the latter) and set in a “garden” of 1d3+1 kelpies. From atop
the central tower the mummy looks up toward the surface and her former
life. The mummy has the form of a shapely woman, tall and stately. Her
body is wrapped in kelp. She has silvery hair that falls to her hips, hollow
eyes that peek from behind the kelp.
When ships pass over the white castle, they traditionally drop a leather
sack of coins and a garland of flowers into the water. The mummy's
treasure might consist of 1d12 x 100 gp and a marble statue of herself in
life worth 5,000 gp and weighing nearly 1 ton.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene

Murder Crow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Eye-rake, death throes
Move: 6/30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Murder crows resemble standard crows except that they stand nearly
4 feet tall with a wingspan of 9 feet. Their tattered feathers are black
and carry the stench of death. The eyes of a murder crow are bleak and
hollow, showing no signs of emotion or life. Murder crows attack with
their jagged beaks and sinister talons. If a murder crow hits an opponent
with both claw attacks in the same round, the victim must save or be
blinded for 1d4 days or until healed. When killed, a murder crow explodes
into a murder of undead ravens.

Copyright Notice: Author Lance Hawvermale.

The Pealing Bell
A small stone bell tower rises in the Boneshay Cemetery. Toppled,
broken stones surround the crumbling structure in a ragged circle. The
ground is pawed and churned, with numerous decayed bodies clawed
from their graves. Many corpses are missing arms and legs. The weathered
headstones are heavily scratched.

A wooden ladder is propped against the squat tower and reaches to
a landing where a 15-foot-tall iron bell lies on its side in the shattered
cupola. The bell's iron shell is rusted through in ragged spots. The fetid
smell of decay hangs heavy in the air. The bell rings out randomly, the
lonely sound echoing across the graveyard. The sound is sharp and
distinct, like a hammer strike on metal.
A murder crow makes its gory nest inside the toppled bell. The undead
bird yanked off the arms and legs of many of the dead to layer its nest.
The nest is six feet across with four foot high sides. The undead bird spies
on PCs through the rust spots. It pecks at the iron shell with its ragged
beak to draw prey closer.

The bird launches out of the bell's opening if the limbs are moved. It
spreads its wings immediately and flaps viciously toward the nearest PC
with a shriek. The crow aims for an eye-rake on its first pass, then sails
into the sky to circle around to come in behind intruders. It caws just
before it strikes, hoping to get them to look up just as its claws slice into
their face.

Undead Raven Swarm: HD 7; AC 6[13]; Atk Swarm (3d6);
Move 18 (flying); Save 9; CL/XP 8/800; Special: Disease,
distraction, eye-rake

Murder-Born
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 incorporeal touch (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Despondent wail, +1 magic weapons to hit
Move: 15 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A murder-born appears as a ghostly image with translucent, yet delicate
features. Its unholy eyes rage with absolute and thorough evil that reflects
its hatred for the living. Spawned of hatred when both mother and child
are murdered, the rapacious soul of the unborn sometimes rises as a foul
and corrupt spirit. A murder-born's incorporeal touch does 1d6 points of
damage. Twice per day, a murder-born can unleash a child-like wail that
causes creatures to be overcome with despair (save resists) and results in
a -1 penalty to saving throws for 24 hours. Magic weapons are required to
hit the incorporeal murder-born.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Sounds in the Walls
The Whaling Inn sits on the edge of a promontory overlooking the
Scourging Sea. The inn is a two-story structure that has seen finer days;
broken windows are boarded up, while the white banister leading to the
front door is split and peeling. Boards creak underfoot in a well-worn path
to the faded doorway. The old innkeeper Arl Nethup welcomes visitors,
although he's as deaf as a post and as difficult to understand because of
his thick accent.
The interior of the inn is pleasant, a far cry from the harsh surroundings
of the fishing town. The inn was an orphanage before tragedy befell
nearly 75 years ago. At the time, a young woman who worked with the
orphans found herself pregnant by a fisherman who never returned from
the harsh waters. She hid her shame, but the townsfolk soon knew of her
condition. The fisherman's parents blamed her for leading their boy to
distraction – and ending with his death on the open waters.
Their hatred bubbled over in their second son, who took a ragtag bunch
of hooligans to help convince the girl to leave the village. One thing led
to another, and the girl was murdered and her body boarded up within the
walls. No one looked too hard for the missing woman.
It was a year after her murder that the screams began in the
orphanage's walls. The wails were loud and unnerving, driving
the owners to sell the building to an entrepreneur who reopened
it as a tourist spot called the Wailing Inn. A spate of suicides by
guests led to his downfall, and the inn fell into disrepair. Finally,
Arj bought and reopened the inn, but misunderstood the name.
When he repainted the signs, he unintentionally renamed it the
Whaling Inn, a name that has stuck for the past 30 years. The inn
is currently the only place to stay within the small village, and
prices are reasonable.
At midnight, wails begin in the building, the sounds emanating
from within the walls. Arj sleeps peacefully through it all; PCs
staying the night won’t be so lucky.
The inn is the home of murder-born twins that hide in the
walls where they and their mother were killed and their bodies
still rest. The twin spirits look identical, and flit through the
hollow space between the walls, reaching through broken gaps
in the bricks and floorboards to touch PCs.
Only one room is silent – the chamber where the murder-borns’
mother is entombed. PCs can put an end to the murder-borns’
rampage by removing the woman's bones and burying them in
the nearby churchyard.

Nazalor
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d8) and bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Stun
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A nazalor is 7-foot-tall bipedal, stocky, bronze furred hyena with
slightly oversized claws and fangs. Its fur is bronze in color with varying
shades depending on the creature's age (young nazalors are brighter in
color while an aged nazalor's coat is dull). Its eyes are usually green or
brown. If a nazalor hits an opponent with both claws and its bite in the
same round, the opponent must save or be stunned for 1d2 rounds from
the ferociousness of the attack.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Night Hunter
A moonless sky leaves the scrublands draped in deep darkness. Fireflies
flit in swirling paths, their glowing trails standing out against the night.
The sounds of animals – the roars of lions, the huffs of wild boars, and
the silent thumps of hooves in the dirt – fill the nighttime air. Stunted trees
stand silent in the gloom.
A nazalor huntress named Fisi stalks the wildlands, her eyes glowing a
faint green. Fisi is a vicious predator, and her scent drives even the great
jungle cats to abandon the plains. Fisi bears the wounds of her run-ins
with the lions, as the great claw marks across her face attest, but she also
wears those same claws woven into the fur of her body after she ripped
them from the dead cat's paws. The bipedal hyena lives in a stone cave
where she raises three nazalor pups. The pups are a couple of months from
setting out on their own to find their own hunting grounds to terrorize.

Necrophidius
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3+3
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Bite (1d8 plus paralysis)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Dance of death, paralysis
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The necrophidius appears to be a great skeletal snake topped with a human
skull. To the dismay of some, it is not undead and therefore cannot be turned
or rebuked. The necrophidius is a construct created by a magicuser to serve as
a guardian or assassin. A typical necrophidius is 10 feet long.

A necrophidius can entrance opponents by swaying back and forth.
Those within 30 feet viewing the dancing snake must succeed on a saving
throw (adding a +1 bonus for high wisdom) or be unable to act for 2d4
rounds. Victims are dazed for the duration of the effect and cannot take
any action other than defending themselves.

A living creature bitten by a necrophidius must succeed on a saving
throw or be paralyzed for 1d6 minutes.

Rattler A variation of the necrophidius, the rattler is constructed from the
skeletal remains of a giant rattlesnake. During the creation process, the
tail rattle is left intact and magicked to create a confusion effect on those
that hear it rattle. The rattler uses the same statistics as the standard
necrophidius except it does not have the necrophidius's dance of death
special attack. Instead it gains the special attack detailed below.
By shaking its tail rattle, the creature emits a rattling noise to a range
of 30 feet. Those within the area that hear this rattle must succeed on a
saving throw or be affected as by a confusion spell for 2d4 rounds.

Construction A necrophidius’ body consists of a human skull and the
skeletal remains of a constrictor snake treated with rare oils and powders
worth at least 1,000 gp. Creating the body requires the cooperation of
a master sculptor and a 10th level magic-user that can cast charm person (or
confusion) and polymorph.

Credit: The Necrophidius originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Simon Tilbrook.

Cone Experimentation
In the hills overlooking a lazy river there is a picturesque chateau, home
to a miserly baroness. The baroness is not popular among her people, not
so much because of cruelty, but rather because of her somber mood and
the shabby state of the manorial village. The peasants of the manor graze
sheep and keep swine and grow crops of wheat, barley and grapes. The
vineyards belong exclusively to the baroness. The baroness grows tiny,
sweet grapes and turns them into a light, sweet white wine, much favored
by the swaggering young merchant class in the nearby market town.
Beneath the baroness’ chateau there is a large cellar complex in which
one can find pantries, an armory, two secret rooms (one containing an iron
maiden) and a wine cellar. The wine cellar has a locked iron door - the
stoutest door in the entire complex, even stronger than the door of the
armory. Inside there are two wooden racks holding irregularly shaped
bottles of wine. The racks reach from floor to ceiling and contain a total of
40 bottles of wine, worth about 10 gp per bottle. Five casks, each holding
about 20 gallons, are set at the back of the room and sealed in parafin wax.
Each cask holds a tincture of vinegar, blood and pitchblende, as well as a
growing a homonculus.
The homonculi are in various states of completion. When finished, they
will be almost perfect duplicates of powerful nobles in the region. The
baroness is an alchemist and believes she has perfected the formula for
creating these clones. At her next gala party, she will replace her rivals
and become the power behind the palatine duchy in which she dwells.
This operation has cost her most of her fortune (hence the shabbiness in
her manorial village).
Another of her creations, a necrophidius, guards the chamber.

Nereid
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Poison spittle (ranged attack, poison)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Beguilement, kiss, poison spittle, spells, change
shape, magic resistance (40%), transparency, vulnerability
Move: 12/15 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Nereids are elemental fey that spend most of their time swimming
through the Elemental Plane of Water. Occasionally one finds her way
into the Material Plane and takes up temporary residence in lakes, rivers,
springs, pools, or inland seas. Many sailors, seafarers, pirates, and other
sea-goers have met their ends at the hands of a nereid. Their natural
beauty lures men to their doom, for behind the beauty of the honeyed
ones lies certain death for any creature that tries to steal a glance or kiss
from a nereid.

A nereid can assume the shape of either a male or female humanoid, and
almost always assumes a female form unless encountering an all-female
party of adventurers. In humanoid form, she can use any of her special
attacks and special qualities and can wield weapons and wear armor
(though a nereid rarely does so). In her water form, she cannot use any of
her special attacks or special qualities, except as noted below. A nereid in
water form moves at her swim speed and can flow through cracks, under
doors, and through small openings. In this form she retains her damage
reduction and AC and gains immunity to poison. A nereid is effectively
invisible in water until she assumes humanoid form.

A nereid's natural form is that of a small pool of water. She can assume
a humanoid form at will and usually employs this form when on the
Material Plane. Some are arrayed in robes of white or gold, but most
appear unclothed. All nereid in humanoid form wear a shawl of white or
gold draped over their shoulders.

Nereids shy away from combat and flee at the first sign of conflict if
possible. If a nereid encounters only female opponents, she assumes the
shape of a handsomely striking male humanoid. A nereid that is attacked
can attempt a saving throw. If successful, she takes no damage and
assumes her natural watery form and flows away.

A creature of the opposite sex viewing a nereid must make succeed on a
saving throw or be instantly smitten and beguiled. This effect is similar to
an charm monster spell and lasts as long as the nereid is in view. Females
viewing a nereid in male form gain a +2 bonus on their saving throw.

Any creature meeting the lips of a nereid must succeed on a saving
throw or take 1d4 points of damage as the nereid floods the creature's
lungs with sea water. Each round thereafter, for the next 10 rounds, the
victim must make a saving throw or take 1d4 points of damage. Three
consecutive successful saves means the character has coughed up enough
water to shake the effects of this attack and takes no further damage. An
affected creature can take no actions other than to defend itself in any
round it takes damage from this ability. At 0 or less hp, the victim
falls unconscious. In the next round, he drowns. Holding one's breath
does not prevent drowning (water is already in the lungs). A dispel magic,
break enchantment, remove curse, heal spell, or successful DC 20 Heal
check halts the damage if applied before the creature reaches 0 or less hit
points. Nereids are not prone to giving kisses. An opponent that attempts
to force a kiss must succeed on a successful grapple check against the
nereid.

Once per round, a nereid can spit a stream of watery poison at an
opponent within 20 feet. A successful ranged attack that ignores armor is
required to hit. A target hit must succeed on a saving throw or be blinded
(as the spell) for 2d6 rounds. A character can take a full round to wash
away the poison using water or similar liquid.

A nereid can form a volume of water within 30 feet into the shape of a serpent
formed of water. A watery serpent is about 6 feet long. It has the same number
of hp as the nereid who created it, and its AC is 4 [15]. Its attacks as the
nereid and deals 1d6 points of damage on each successful attack against an
opponent.

A nereid need not concentrate to maintain the watery serpent. She can direct
it to a new target as a move action if she wishes. At hp 0, the serpent
collapses into normal water. A nereid can only have one such watery serpent in
existence at a given time. The watery serpent lasts until destroyed or until
the nereid dismisses it or dies.  At will, nereids can lower water and part
water.

The nereid's shawl contains a portion of her life force. If it is ever
destroyed, the nereid to which it belongs immediately and forever dissolves
into formless water.

Sea God's Shrine
In a wild, mountainous district of the kingdom there is a magnificent
shrine the sea god. The shrine is notable not only for its distance (40
miles) from the sea, but also for its inhabitant, a nereid.
The nereid most often takes the form of a beautiful woman, a woman
who bears a striking resemblance to the grandmother of the present king.
Her shrine consists of eleven thick, marble pillars surrounding a pool of
crystal clear water so deep one cannot perceive the bottom. In fact, this
pool is connected to the Elemental Plane of Water. A person swimming
more than 100 feet into the pool will find themselves in the elemental
plane. A statue in limestone of the sea god stands astride the pool.
The nereid shares her shrine with a giant, venomous serpent (3 HD,
15 hp). One of the pillars is hollow and can be accessed from beneath
the surface of the pool via a narrow tunnel. The tunnel is located 12 feet
below the surface and is small enough that only a halfling would be able
to swim into it and have a hope of getting back out. Inside this hollow
pool the nereid stores offerings to the temple. These offerings might
include 3d10 x 100 sp, 2d8 x 100 gp and a silver ewer worth 1d4 x 50 gp.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Netherspark
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 slams (1d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Negative energy ray, negative energy burst,
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A netherspark is a 6-foot-tall humanoid whose form is composed of dark
matter. Its head is featureless and sports no eyes, ears, nose, or mouth. It
wears no clothes, and bands of silver and white crackle and dance in
its form. A netherspark radiates an aura of negative energy that does 1
point of damage to any creature in a 10-foot radius. Undead heal 1 point
each round. Once every 1d4 rounds, a netherspark can release a burst
of negative energy in a 20-foot radius that does 1d8 points of damage
(undead heal 1d8 points). A netherspark can release a ray of energy in a
40-foot line that drains 1 level (save resists).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Good, the Bad And the Netherspark
The iron door to this chamber is bolted and locked from the outside.
Beyond the door lies a half-dome room with a flat stone floor. Two spheres
the size of wagon wheels hover 10 feet above the ground. The spheres
rotate around one another, seeming to attract and repel each other's
presence. Silent white and black lightning fills the room originating from
the spheres. The beams of energy leave short-lived trails of white and
black marks on the room's surfaces. Below the spheres are two kneeling
angel statues and two kneeling demonic statues with their arms raised as
if reaching for the gyrating energy balls. The statues alternate between
angel and demon.
Regardless of PCs’ actions, a black energy beam flashes across any
living creature viewing the room through the opened door. The beam
appears harmless, but the spheres immediately begin rotating at incredible
speeds. Within moments, the black sphere overtakes the white in a sudden
burst of absolute darkness. The ebon burst extinguishes all light sources
immediately, although they maybe relit or cast. Permanent magical light
sources relight after 1d4 hours. The spheres disappear and the statues turn
into oozing mud leaving a netherspark in their wake.

Nilbog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  1 mace (1d6) or javelin (1d4)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Spatio-temporal reversal, damage reversal
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

The nilbog is a goblin afflicted with a strange space-time reversal disease
known as nilbogism. The disease appears to occur when overly heavy use
of magic strains the fabric of the space-time continuum and leads to some
very strange localized events. The disease only affects goblins and is not
transmitted by them. In appearance, nilbogs are indistinguishable from
goblins.
A nilbog constantly emanates an aura of confusion in a 20-foot-radius. A
creature in the area must succeed on a saving throw or be affected.
When struck by any attack that would normally damage it, the nilbog
actually gains hp equal to the damage the attack would have
otherwise dealt. A nilbog gains any extra hp above its normal total
as temporary hp, though it can never have more than twice its
normal hp.
The nilbog can only be damaged through the use of curative magic and
effects (cure light wounds and healing potions, for instance). Curative
magic deals damage equal to the amount it would normally heal.

Slavers of the Underworld
While circumnavigating a large lake set in the midst of low, tropical
hills populated by several herds of elephants you come across a guest
house. The guest house is built of white stone and set on a gentle rise
overlooking the lake in a place where the elephants seem to enjoy
congregating. On the other side of the rise there are terraced fields of tea
and pepper and at the bottom of the hill, in a swampy area, rice fields. A
wooden hand bridge spans the swampy area, allowing a number of free
villagers who dwell on a hill in sight of the guest house to access their
fields. The owner of the guest house, a pleasant but rather dull-witted
fellow who claims to be an exiled duke, does not own the village, but he
does purchase their goods.
If one can overcome the xenophobia of the villagers, they will learn that
the duke is quite mad and that those of his guests that do not disappear
end up leaving after no more than 24 hours, some a bit touched in the
head themselves.
The duke will assure people that this is not the case. He sets a fine table,
with heaping trenchers of fish on rice with slices of citrons, spicy curries
of okra, peanuts and carrots and generous goblets of sura (a rice wine) and
much smaller glasses of brandy wine. The quarters in the guest house are
open to the night air, with only wooden latices and sheer cotton curtains
protecting one from the large mosquitos that prowl the night. The guest
house usually has four rooms available, each able to comfortably house
two people and each set in the corners of the guest house's ground floor. A
dining room, kitchen and entry make up the remainder of the ground floor
while the upper floor contains a large, open patio/sitting area, a library
of scrolls and books and the large bedchamber of the duke. A staircase
separates the floors, with a door at the bottom and a second door at the
top. Both doors are thick oak and locked at night.
There is a 1 in 6 chance each night that a band of nilbogs who dwell
in caverns deep beneath the guest house will conduct a raid. The bizarre
creatures are primarily slave traders of the underworld, taking captives
down the weird, winding stair in the guest house's wine cellar to their
own lair, which connects via tunnels to many other lairs of subterranean
folk. Large captives are sold to the duergar to haul rock from their
mines, attractive folk to the drow to be turned into house servants (they
prefer eunuchs, so watch out fellas) and just about everyone else to the

hobgoblins, grimlocks or bugbears to be used as slave labor and cannon
fodder.
The nilbog band is composed of 1d10 x 100 nilbogs plus as many
noncombatants. The nilbogs are led by one 3 HD sub-chief per 20 warriors
and one 5 HD chief. Their lair consists of a large central chamber wherein
is kept the sacred fire beneath an obsidian slab (used for cooking and
the occaisional slow, painful sacrifice) and many smaller living chambers
connected to the central chamber. The warriors wear leather armor and
carry shields made from the hardened caparaces of purple-black beetles.
They carry long, barbed whips and maces with large metal disc heads on
flexible lengths of thick leather.
The nilbog's treasure might consist of 1d20 x 10 cp, 1d20 x 100 sp, 1d4
x 100 gp, and a brass buckle set with a moonstone worth 1d8 x 100 gp.
The buckle is worn by the chief.

Credit: The Nilbog originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/ Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Roger
Musson.

Niln (Vapor Horror)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Drench, drowning fog
Move: 24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Nilns are large, amorphous clouds of nearly transparent vapor. Small
water droplets dance and play around their form and occasionally drop
to the ground. Three large sapphire droplets function as eyes. When
manipulating objects or attacking, nilns form wispy and vaporous
tendrils that coat everything in water and put out open flames. Once per
day, the niln can create a muggy cloud around it that spreads to fill a 20foot radius. This moving fog fills a victim's lungs with water as if he is
drowning (2d6 damage, save resists).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Steam Heat
The Haunted Bathhouse of Hylat is a three-room stone building on
the grounds of the old Koilton Estate. Steam from a gurgling mineral
hot spring fills the bathhouse with steamy vapors. The steam vents
upward through a small circular opening cut into the floor in the center
of the middle room. The temperature in the two outer rooms hovers at
90 degrees, while the center room is an uncomfortable 110 degrees.
Enchanted gold rocks spit and hiss in the water, creating the thick clouds
of steam. The water smells heavily of sulfur, and is supposed to healing
properties. There are 6 gold rocks, each worth 50 gp.
A niln lives inside the watery hole, and rises out with the steam clouds
if anyone disturbs the enchanted gold. The niln revels in the intense heat
and drowns anyone who tries to take that away from it.

Nuckalavee
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 hooves (1d6), bite (1d6) and 1 weapon (2d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Breath weapon, fearful presence
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A nuckalavee is a large skinless warhorse with a rider of similar makeup, though closer inspection reveals the rider is actually part of the
monster itself, growing straight out of the horse's back. The monster's
internal organs, veins that carry its blackened blood, and corded muscles
are all visible. Its body is covered with a thin layer of putrid reddish
mucus. The sight of a nuckalavee incites fear in creatures within 30 feet
that see it (as per the spell, save resists). Nuckalavee relish combat and
attack with a combination of weapon, bite and hoof. Once every four
rounds, the nuckalavee can breathe a cloud of noxious gas from its horse
head that liquefies organs of those around it (6d6 damage, save for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Warhorse Warlord
A partially skinned warhorse stampedes through the PCs’ camp, the
animal's hide ripped in wide flapping strips down its sides. Blood sprays
in thick droplets behind it as it runs. The animal screams in terror and
pain.
Chasing it is Death-Bringer, a self-named nuckalavee killer who
refuses to allow any stallions into his Wyndes Forest home. The massive
warhorse warlord arrives in a flash of blade, stamping hooves, skinned
flesh and taut muscle. The Death-Bringer takes mares for his harem, and
kills stallions – and their owners – for food. The nuckalavee gives up his
pursuit of the fleeing horse (it’ll be dead in a day if not healed) if PCs
have mounts with them.
The Death-Bringer keeps a herd of 30 mares that graze around a mudand-dirt lean-to in the center of the forest. The mares remain close to the
nuckalavee's lair out of fear more than anything else. A saddle from a
past meal contains 100 gp and a horse bowl that fills with clear water on
command.

Oakman
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: +1 staff (1d6+1)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Magic weapon, tree stride
Move: 6/9 (climb)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

An oakman stands just less than 4 feet tall. Its skin is brownish-green
and as tough as tree bark, and he has unkempt green hair. Its eyes are
either green or brown and its nose is slightly large and bulbous. Any
oaken staff or club wielded by an oakman is considered a +1 weapon. An
oakman is usually bound to a single enormous oak that he can never stray
more than 1 mile from. He uses his tree stride ability to travel between
trees to roam his territory. An oakman likes to sit in his tree and insult
passers-by.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Mossy Oak
Along the path stands a mighty oak. Its limbs sag with an abundance
of acorns. Hundreds of names and limericks have been carved into its
monstrous trunk. A thin wisp of smoke drifts upward to where a small
weathered man lounges on a limb just out of reach. Dressed in a muted
green suit, he gnaws on a long pipe with knotty teeth. This wisecracking
oakman goes by the name Dimbort Oakjob. He enjoys badgering
travelers and smoking his pipe weed. He never gives a straight answer
and is often cruel and rude in his taunts, puns and insults. Example of
his jabs include:
• Your mother's armpits are so hairy, it looks like she has a bugbear in
a headlock.
• You’ll never be the man your mother is …
• Talking to you is as appealing as playing leapfrog with unicorns.
• I’ve met ghouls with less offensive breath than yours.
• You’re as welcome as fleas in a gnolls’ den.
• Now go away or I shall taunt you a second time.
• Someone said you are not fit to sleep with orcs. I stuck up
for the orcs.
• The orc-breeding is certainly obvious in your family.
• He's so short, his hair smells like feet.
• He’d steal the straw from his mother's kennel.
• I certainly hope you’re sterile.
• You’re as strong as an ogre and almost as
intelligent.
After a bit of fun, Dimbort requests an errand. In
turn, he promises to make a special magical moss
cake that will grant the consumer wondrous powers.
Oakmen are known for their extraordinary culinary
skills and magical talents. While he has plenty
of moss locally to create moss cakes, it takes a
rare exotic moss named Sylvan's Beard to make
something truly great. Since he cannot venture far
from his tree, he needs someone to harvest the rare
moss. Just down the road a piece is a small rocky
knob. A cave at the top of the hill has a mystical
spring, around which grows the pink moss. Dimbort
needs enough to fill a basket, of which he just
happens to have a few lying around. He promises the
rewards are well worth the stroll through the woods.
The moss cakes he bakes have the ability to cure
disease and rid the body of poisons. (See the Geon and
Giant, Cave for more on this encounter.)

Obsidian Minotaur
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: -2 [21]
Attack:  2 claws (2d8 plus 1d6 fire), breath weapon
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, burn, immune to magic
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3200

An obsidian minotaur stands 12 feet tall and weighs roughly 2,000
pounds. It appears to be a minotaur carved from a single block of obsidian
and then animated via some eldritch ritual. Small pinpoints of blue light
can be seen in its eyes.

The obsidian minotaur is often employed by spellcasters as a guardian or
assassin. As a guardian, the obsidian minotaur activates when trespassers
enter an area it is programmed to protect. As an assassin, it actively hunts
down the targeted victim.

Once every 1d4+1 rounds, an obsidian minotaur can expel a cloud of
gas directly in front of it. The cloud fills a 10-foot cube and lasts for
1 round before dispersing. Any creature in the area must succeed on a
saving throw or be slowed (as the slow spell).

The claws of an obsidian minotaur deal 1d6 points of burning damage
each time they hit. A creature hit must succeed on a saving throw or take
an additional 1d6 points of fire damage for 1d4+1 rounds as clothes ignite
and armor becomes searing hot.

An obsidian minotaur is immune to most spells. Certain spells and
effects function differently against the creature as noted below.
A transmute rock to mud spell slows it (as the slow spell) for 2d6
rounds, with no saving throw, while transmute mud to rock heals all of
its hp.

A stone to flesh spell does not actually change the obsidian minotaur's
structure but negates its immunity to magic for 1 full round.

Construction An obsidian minotaur is sculpted from 2,500 pounds of black obsidian
worth at least 3,000 gp. Assembling the body requires a 17th level magicuser and a master sculptor. The magic-user must be able to cast fireball
and wish.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Ceaseless Diligence
The story of the obsidian minotaur is well known in the low country. It
seems that 200 years ago a thief by the name of Billy Mire stole something
of value from a powerful magic-user (her daughter, to be precise). Billy
Mire and his lady love escaped clean away, and the canny thief had the
werewithal to keep their location hidden from the sorcerous powers of
the magic-user.
Possessed with a powerful thirst for vengeance, the magic-user never
forgave the thief and eventually put her fortune and her knowledge to
the task of constructing an obsidian minotaur. Merchant vessels plying
the waves between the new and old worlds brought her a massive slab
of obsidian cut from the hills around a sacred volcano. Rare, expensive
unguents were purchased from traders to the east. A master sculptor from
the house of the golden patriarch of the south was hired to create the
beast. With the magic-user's final breath, she charged her new creation
with the task of killing Billy Mire. Unfortunately, she did this without
passing on the knowledge of his appearance.
For 200 years, the obsidian minotaur has wandered the lowlands,
stopping any it sees and bellowing out the same question, “Be you Billy
Mire the Thief?”. Of course, nobody, even a person unfortunate enough
to share that legendary thief's name, is stupid enough to answer in the
affirmative, and the beast plods on, unable to magically discern the thief's
location and not bright enough to search outside the lowlands.

Ogren
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d8)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Ogrens are 6- to 8-foot-tall stocky humanoids with hairy hides of dark
brown, yellowish-brown, or gray. Their eyes are generally gray or black,
though some do have green or blue eyes. Hair color ranges from brown
or black to dark red or gray. Most ogren have long hair and rarely if ever
sport facial hair. The typical ogren lives to 100 years of age. Ogrens are a
mix of a male ogre and a female hobgoblin.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Stop the Wedding!
Occral Tusk-breaker of the Rockbasher Tribe has to find a bride before
the new moon. He's already past the age when his warrior brethren took
wives, and the daily taunts and beatings he endures are driving him over
the edge.
Quarn Morningfever, the Rockbasher's shaman, told the young ogren
he’d “find his mate in the vale.” Quarn meant the Mastadon Vale, but
Occral misheard “pale” and decided he was chosen to find a human or
elf wife. He packed his weapons, put on his cleanest loincloth, and left
the tribe that night.
He's been watching the entrance to the farming village of Horcross for
three days, but no one so far has struck his fancy. The problem is further
compounded by the fact that the ogren is fasting to purify himself for
his marriage, leaving him starving, slightly dehydrated, and a little
delirious.
He's beyond caring about what his “mate” looks like, and is ready
to find any PC camping out in the open forest. He storms into camp,
snatches up a sleeping “mate,” and dashes into the forest. He heads
immediately back to his tribe to “prove himself” by marrying his chosen
during the next full moon.

Ogrillon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  2 strikes (1d4+1)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Reinforced fists
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Ogrillons are a fierce half-ogre race born of a union between a female
orc and a male ogre. They tend to act like ogres, but they are far more
violent and aggressive than their larger kin. Ogrillons are usually only
slightly taller than orcs, with features that strongly favor their orc parent,
so much so that most ogrillons are indiscernible from normal orcs. About
10% of ogrillons resemble their ogre parent. Ogrillon's skin is covered in
closely fitting bony plates and nodes akin to an alligator.
Ogrillons love nothing more than combat. They are a race so inborn to
be warriors that they seem almost depressed and dejected when they are
not involved in melee. They only time an ogrillon laughs is when it is
the center of a whirlwind of melee and covered in its opponent's blood.
Ogrillons do not care for armor or weapons and in fact carry very little
gear at all. They do, however, like gold pieces and usually keep a few in
a filthy pouch with other shiny trinkets as lucky charms.
Ogrillons speak orc and ogre, and about 10% are intelligent enough to
have learned the common tongue.
Ogrillons disdain the use of armor, relying solely on their natural armor
to protect them. They also disdain the use of weapons, preferring to leap
headlong into a fray with fists swinging madly. Ogrillons are considered
to be armed even when unarmed (i.e., they do not provoke attacks of
opportunity from armed opponents when attacking them and can
themselves still make an attack of opportunity against an opponent that
attacks unarmed). Additionally, they always deal lethal damage rather
than nonlethal damage when fighting unarmed.

Credit: The Ogrillon originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by R. K. R. Chilman.

A Tale of Two Tribes
Between two sister cities (daughters of Marduk and thoroughly
sentient) there is a thick range of mountains. The only pass through the
mountains winds up on a rugged volcanic field of flat-topped volcanoes
and domes of brownish-green volcanic glass and slowflake obsidian. The
land is fairly barren save for some stubby, cantankerous stands of grass
and woody fluorescing golden shrubs.
The volcanic field is inhabited by two tribes of ogrillons, the Eaters of
Hearts and the Drinkers of Blood, both consisting of 5d6 ogrillons. The
names of the tribes are quite accurate and do a fine job of summing up
their key cultural traits. The Eaters dwell in the northern portion of the
field in tents of animal hide set up at the obsidian base of a flat-topped
volcano, while the Drinkers roam the southern portions in a number of
small warbands that dwell in old volcanic tubes. Each tribe is ruled by a
chief (5 to 7 HD) and has as its primary form of entertainment the capture
of the royal post that runs between the sister cities.
The royal post consists of teams of adventurers and explorers hired to
move correspondence and cargo between the cities. Few other outsiders
venture onto the volcanic field. Post expeditions are sporadic, to keep the
ogrillons from preparing elaborate attacks. Encounters occur on a roll of
1-3 on 1d6. A roll of one indicates a warband of 1d6+2 ogrillons from
the Eaters of Hearts, a roll of two a similar warband of ogrillon from the
Drinkers of Blood and a roll of three indicates a warband from each tribe.
When a warband of both tribes is present, there is a fair chance they will
attack one another instead of the intruders.
A typical tribal treasure consists of 1d12 x 10 cp, 2d12 x 100 sp and
2d12 x 10 gp.

Oil Shark
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8+4)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: immune to fire
Move: 24 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Oil sharks are, on average, about 20 feet long, though they can reach
lengths of 40 feet or more. Oil sharks resembles standard sharks with
blackish-blue, metallic scales and dull gray eyes. They are blind and rely
completely upon their “sonar” to hunt their prey. They are immune to fire.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Oil and Water
The sea blazes with burning oil, the air above the water thick with black
smoke that is visible from miles away. Fire leaps from wave to wave, and
burning dolphins and other sea creatures surface briefly before bursting
into flame. Drifts of seaweed burn on the surface, a floating bonfire tossed
by the currents. A dying mermaid lies across a chunk of drifting wood,
her tail severed cleanly. Three other mermaids swim around their injured
sister, slapping at the water as large fins split the sea.
A natural crevice on the ocean floor split apart during a recent undersea
quake and released a natural reservoir of oil into the water. The oil burst
upward in a billowing cloud, forming a patch of oil miles wide across the
surface. A spark of lightning ignited the patch into this current inferno.
Left alone, the oil burns for another week before the reservoir empties.
A dozen oil sharks swim around the conflagration in wide circles around
and through the burning pitch. A colony of mermaids was the first victims
of the voracious monsters, with a mere handful escaping the gnashing
jaws. They plead with passing sailors for aid in getting rid of the foul
creatures polluting their ocean. They offer 10 giant pearls (600 gp each)
for helping them.

Olive Slime
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Olive slime is a plantlike growth found in dark, damp underground areas. It is
sticky, wet, and olive drab in color. It clings to walls, ceilings, and floors
and consumes any organic matter it contacts. Olive slime can detect prey by
vibration to a range of 30 feet and drops from ceilings and walls when it
detects movement underneath it.

When a patch of olive slime drops and attaches to a foe (the host), it
secretes a numbing poison that makes its presence go unnoticed. A creature
viewing the host can successfully notice the olive slime on a roll of 1 on
1d6. Within 5 feet of the host, the olive slime is easily noticed.

An olive slime that has attached itself affects the thinking pattern of its
host so the host's main concern becomes how to feed and protect the olive
slime (including keeping the creature hidden from any adventuring companions).
This effect is similar to a charm monster spell. If a creature attempts to
remove the olive slime from the host, the host either attacks that creature or
attempts to flee the area. The only way to successfully break the brain link
is to destroy the olive slime, destroy the host, or remove the olive slime
from the host.

A single patch of olive slime deals 1d6 points of constitution damage each day
as it devours flesh, replacing skin and muscle tissue. Additionally, the host
must double its normal food intake each day or sustain an additional 1 point
of constitution damage each day. On days the host does not eat twice its
normal food intake it does not naturally heal any damage (including ability
damage). At constitution 0, the host dies and its body transforms into a slime
zombie. (See the slime zombie below.)

Olive slime can be burned, frozen, or cut away (dealing an equal
amount of damage to the host as well). Anything that deals acid, cold or
fire damage, or a cure disease spell destroys a patch of olive slime.

Credit: The Olive Slime originally appeared in the First Edition module S4
Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the
First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used
by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Sweaty Palms
While traversing the deeper portions of the underworld, the adventurers
come across a peculiar sound - a tinny clink-clank that echoes through the
tunnels in a strange, lazy rhythm. The sound comes from a gray-headed
tinker and trader. The trader walks next to a half-starved and frightened
mule, his pots and pans clanging as he walks. His eyes are vacant, his
skin clammy and pale. The man is under the control of an olive slime, the
slime having attached itself to his back and now working its way down
his arms. Being polite (and devious), he will offer his hand to visitors,
allowing a portion of the slime to attack them.

Olive Slime Zombie
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Slam (1d6 plus infestation)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Infestation, death throes, mind link, telepathic
bond, immunity to electricity
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Slime zombies (or olive slime creatures) are created when a living
creature is slain by a patch of olive slime (see that entry). The slime
zombie's sole purpose for existence is to capture or kill new prey for its
master (i.e., the olive slime that created it).
A slime zombie resembles a humanoid blob, olive drab in color. The
creature bears no distinguishing marks or facial features. It can speak
to others of its kind through telepathy, but otherwise makes no sound or
noise.

Any creature hit by the slime zombie's attack must succeed on a saving
throw or be infested with olive slime. This infestation works as described
in the olive slime entry.

When a slime zombie is brought to 0 hp, its structure collapses
and it transforms in a single round as a pool of olive slime (see that entry
in this book).

A slime zombie is linked symbiotically with the patch of olive slime that
created it. This link has a maximum range of 200 miles. Both the slime
zombie and olive slime must be on the same plane of existence.
Olive slime zombies have a telepathic bond with each other to a range
of 100 feet if they were created by the same olive slime. This bond allows
them rudimentary communication with one another.

Credit: The Olive Slime Creature originally appeared in the First Edition
module S4 Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast,
1982) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Deer, Onyx
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 hooves (1d4), 1 gore (1d8) and bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Bellow, petrification
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

These intelligent herd animals resemble large deer, with dark brown
heads and chests changing to light brown along the rest of its body. Most
have a large white patch on their back and rump. An onyx deer has huge
antlers, at least as wide as a human is tall. Twice per day, an onyx deer can
unleash a bellow that instills fear (as per the spell) in any creature within
100 feet that hears it and fails a save to resist. There is a 10% cumulative
chance each time an opponent is bitten by an onyx deer that he turns to
stone (onyx).

Deerly Departed
Stone animals litter a mile-square area of the Hargstolt Woods. Petrified
rabbits munch on leaves, deer stand unblinking in the treeline, and a lone
stone wolf crouches in mid-growl. The animals are solid granite, and
pitted and discolored from the elements.
Animals aren’t the only things in the odd landscape. Lying on his back
in a clump of thick weeds is Ernst Doxil. The naked woodsman's body is
curled up asleep, although a large bite is visible on his bare thigh. A stone
to flesh spell cures the sleeping woodsman, who doesn’t realize he's been
missing for nearly three years. He wakes up thinking it's the next morning
and is surprised to find himself naked (his nightclothes disintegrated
around him while his stone body slept).
An onyx deer chanced upon Ernst while he slept, and delivered the bite
that turned the woodsman to stone. The same deer is responsible for the
animals throughout the Hargstolt Woods. The territorial deer bellows at
intruders, hoping to stun them long enough to deliver its bite.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Ooze, Amber
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: —
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Poison
Move: 4
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

An amber ooze is approximately 1 foot in diameter, and is a dark amber
color and smells of ale. Attracted to liquor, the ooze hides in kegs and
wineskins. If ingested, amber ooze secretes a poison that does 1d6 points
of damage each day the ooze remains in a victim. The host is allowed a
save each day to expel the ooze.

Drink and Be Merry
Five drunken men stagger into the Last Drop Tavern, each carrying a
small keg of ale. The men are celebrating the groom's wedding in the
morning and are making the most of his last day of bachelorhood with an
all-night bender that has already made its way through three taverns. The
group props the small ale kegs on the bar, pays the bartender a hefty sum
to tap and serve them, and promises free ale for everyone.
Unfortunately, the groomsmen were too cheap to spring for the “good
stuff” and bought the ale from a side alley dealer. Unbeknownst to them,
three of the five kegs contain a mix of alcohol and amber oozes. There's
a 3 in 6 chance that any PC who partakes of the free drinks gets an amber
ooze in his frothy glass.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Ooze, Crystal
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  Strike (2d6 plus paralysis)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Acid, paralysis, immune to acid, cold and fire,
transparent, water dependent
Move: 3/6 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

The crystal ooze is an aquatic variety of the gray ooze. It is
semitransparent and clear, almost impossible to see in the water and looks
like nothing more than a puddle of water. The crystal ooze can grow to a
length of up to 8 feet and a thickness of about 6 inches.
A crystal ooze secretes a digestive acid that quickly dissolves organic
material, but not metal. Half of the damage from a melee hit is from
this acid. Non-metal armor or clothing dissolves and becomes useless
immediately unless its wearer succeeds on a saving throw. A wooden
weapon that strikes a crystal ooze also dissolves immediately unless the
wielder succeeds on a saving throw.
In addition to its digestive acid, a crystal ooze secretes a paralytic slime.
A target hit by a crystal ooze's strike must succeed on a saving throw or
be paralyzed for 3d6 rounds.
Crystal oozes can survive out of the water for 5 hours.

Drink to Health and Long Life
A company of yeoman archers is camped on the banks of a jungle
river. Explorers from the north, they are clothed in tattered crimson
tunics and wear chainmail hauberks and wide, flat helms of steel. The
archers carry longbows and battle axes. The leader of the expedition is a
smarmy merchant-prince who wears a long wig of flaxen curls and keeps
a generous amount of wax on his long mustache. The merchant-prince
and his men seek a fountain of longevity.
A stone's throw from the camp, but hidden by the thick foliage, is an
ancient stone city. Little remains of it now but a few toppled pillars and
overgrown piazzas. The largest pillar contains three ornate cisterns, each
holding a shallow pool of water. Two of the three cisterns are home to
crystal oozes, who use their resemblance to water to capture small birds
and insects. The third cistern is actually fed by a underground spring via
a number of thin tubes cut through the stone.
If more than 100 pounds is placed in the circular cistern the bottom
corkscrews downward, finally coming to rest 30 feet under the surface in
the bed of a swift, shallow stream if icy water. As soon as less than 100
pounds is resting on the descending stone pillar, it will corkscrew back
up to its original position in the cistern. The stream originates as the runoff from a subterranean glacier that abuts a cavern warmed by volcanic
action occuring beneath it.

The stream flows into a golden basin located in an alabaster cavern. The
basin puts off a low, softly waxing and waning light. The water that fills
the basin has the properties of a potion of longevity, though this magical
effect only persists for 1 hour after the water is removed from the basin. A
large (8 HD) crystal ooze dwells at the bottom of the basin, preserved by
its magic but still devilishly hungry.

Credit: The Crystal Ooze originally appeared in the First Edition module S4
The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in
the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is
used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Ooze, Entropic
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 pseudopod (2d6 + level drain)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: 25% magic resistant, devour soul
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

An entropic ooze is an amorphous mass of black protoplasm that covers
an area of 15 feet or more. It resembles a black pudding, for which it is
often mistaken. Entropic oozes devour the souls of creatures they slay.
Creatures that lose their souls in such a way cannot be returned to life
until the entropic ooze containing the soul is slain. Living creatures hit by
an entropic ooze lose two levels unless they save to resist the level drain.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Ooze, Entropic-Dark Matter
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 20
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 pseudopod (2d8 + level drain)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: 25% magic resistant, devour soul
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 23/1,700

Dark matter entropic oozes are amorphous masses of black protoplasm
that cover areas of 25 feet or more. They are the larger cousins of regular
entropic oozes. Dark matter entropic oozes devour the souls of creatures
they slay. Creatures that lose their souls in such a way cannot be returned
to life until the entropic ooze containing the soul is slain. Living creatures
hit by an entropic ooze lose three levels unless they save to resist the
level drain.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

In His Hands
The 20-foot-tall corridor is topped by golden arches that raise the
ceiling to a curving point. Columns line the white marble walls, and the
floor is decorated with a checkerboard pattern of black-and-white tiles.
The corridor is 30 feet from wall to wall and runs nearly 150 feet to a pale
altar carved of feldspar.

Standing on each side of the corridor are 15-foot-tall stone statues
carved into the image of a muscular man holding a black glass globe
above his head. There are 16 of the statues, eight on each side of the
hallway. One of the statues halfway down the corridor is actually a stone
golem holding an entropic ooze trapped in a glass sphere. The golem
slams the ooze to the tiled floor, splashing the creature across PCs in the
area. The golem then defends the altar as the ooze devours PCs.

Ooze, Glacial
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 slam (2d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: cold, engulf, transparent, immune to cold and
blunt weapons
Move: 4/12 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A glacial ooze is an enormous jelly found in arctic climates. This
creature appears as translucent bluish-white icy sludge about 10 feet on
each side (though larger specimens have been encountered). This ooze is
conjectured to be a relative of the gelatinous cube. Glacial oozes absorb
all bodily fluids and liquids from a corpse, leaving behind a frozen and
rotting husk. They can form a pseudopod to pummel foes, and their
freezing touch deals 1d6 damage. If a glacial ooze strikes a foe, it can
decide on its next attack to instead engulf that opponent (save avoids).
Engulfed enemies take 1d6 points of cold damage until freed.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Icy Clutches
A moose skeleton juts from an icy wall in the frozen corridors of the
Wailing Glacier. The skeletons gleams a bleached white. The tunnel is
coated in a thick layer of ice that halves movement to avoid slipping on
the treacherous ice (1d3 points of damage). The moose is caught in a
glacial ooze controlled by the magic-user Paavo Janvarias, and is slowly
being dissolved of flesh so the wizard can eventually animate its bones as
one of his skeletal minions.

The ooze appears to be a portion of the wall, and lashes out to grab PCs
who approach it. Riding alongside the moose skeleton are three animated
skeletons ordered to defend the ooze. These skeletons step out of the
glacial ooze's mass and attack if the ooze is struck.

Ooze, Magma
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attack:  Strike (2d6 plus 2d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Lava, immune to fire, double damage from cold,
split
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A magma ooze appears to be a pool of bubbling and churning molten
rock. They are almost always found in or near volcanoes and other warm
or hot places. Magma oozes do not approach water and are never found
near such sources. Magma oozes can grow to a length of 10 feet, with a
thickness of about 6 inches. A magma ooze can climbs walls and move
across ceilings.
The magma ooze is formed of molten rock. Any melee hit deals 2d6
points of burning damage. The damage continues for 1d3 rounds, but
deals only 1d6 points of damage per round during this time.
Slashing and piercing weapons deal no damage to a magma ooze.
Instead, they split the creature into two identical oozes, each with half of
the original's current hp (round down). A magma ooze with 10 hit
points or less cannot be further split.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Hot Bath!
In a pleasant valley of plum trees and tall, sweet grasses grazed upon
by small, swift antelopes there is a chain of three small villages. Each
village is built around an ancient, medicinal bath. These baths are small
buildings of four chambers - an entry chamber clad in aged marble where
people can disrobe, a side chamber where clothing is stored, a secondary
chamber holding an idol that resembles a pot-bellied old man with large
ears, squinty eyes, six arms (each holding a golden pear) and two long
tusks jutting from his bottom jaw.
From the idol chamber one can climb down a narrow shaft into a grotto.
The grotto holds a steaming medicinal spring with a few marble benches
placed in it for bathers to sit on. The water is warm but not scalding and a
long soak doubles a person's natural rate of healing and grants them a +1
bonus to save vs. disease and poison for 1d6 days.
The largest of the villages is dominated by a small castello, a stone
keep ruled by the valley's prencipicu, a boy prince with golden ringlets
and olive skin. His castello is surrounded by tall Italian cypresses and
dozens of tall homes in orderly rows. In the prencipicu's cellars there
is a deep grotto with a private bath, this one clad in marble with copper
fixtures and attending servants. This bath is warmer than the others, for
about 15 feet beneath it there is an active flow of magma. A magma ooze
has recently flowed down to the cavern located directly beneath the bath.
It has discovered a small crack through which it is working its way into
the bath.

Ooze, Mercury
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  Strike (2d4 plus mercury poisoning)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Mercury poisoning
Move: 12/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A mercury ooze resembles a swirling thick pool of silvery-white
mercury about 8 feet long and 6 inches thick. It can compress its body to
a thickness of 1 inch to slip into cracks and crevices.
A creature hit by a mercury ooze has 1 point of constitution and 1 point
of dexterity permanently drained from them unless they pass a saving
throw. One week after suffering the drain, the opponent must succeed on
a saving throw or be affected as if by an insanity spell. The effects can be
removed by the successful casting of a wish spell.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

In Case of Emergency, Do Not Break Glass
A dusty, forgotten chamber in a dungeon is empty save for a crystal tube
that runs from the ceiling to the floor. The tube is filled with a silvery gray
fluid that seems to move at irregular speeds through the tube, sometimes
from floor to ceiling, sometimes from ceiling to floor. The crystal tube
is quite difficult to break. It will take 48 points of damage from metal
weapons to finally shatter it and release the three mercury oozes that
dwell within. Each time a weapon strikes the tube, a metallic keening
fills the chamber, causing dust to fall from the ceiling and forcing all
within the chamber to pass a saving throw or suffer 1d3 points of wisdom
damage and become slightly disoriented. The tube connects two glass
spheres, one embedded in the ceiling, the other the floor. The sphere in
the floor contains a single diamond worth 2,500 gp.

Ooze, Metallic
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d8)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Acid, irritating fumes, immune to blunt weapons
Move: 6/3 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A metallic ooze appears as a 9-foot blob of protoplasm of varying hue
and color. Its form is coarse and rough giving it the appearance of piles
of coins. A metallic ooze can flatten its body in order to squeeze through
spaces and cracks. Metallic oozes come in a variety of sizes and colors:
gold, silver, platinum, copper, brass, or bronze. They form pseudopods
to attack foes. If a hoard ooze hits a creature, it can decide to engulf
that opponent in the next round. Engulfed creatures are trapped inside
its body, where the ooze's acid desolves organic matter (1d6 points of
damage each round). If burned, the ooze emits a cloud of vapor that burns
the eyes and lungs of creatures within 10 feet (2d6 damage, save for half).

Coin Collector
The underground passage opens into a 30-foot-square room lit by
glowing globes that bob about the ceiling. Shadows dance around the
chamber. In the center of the room, a 15-foot-long red dragon lies curled
on the floor, a mound of coins scattered around its sides and snout. Steam
rises in breathlike wisps from its nostrils, and the sound of its breathing
fills the chamber.

The “dragon” is a life-like (but much smaller) ceramic idol to
Horvorrance, a wyrm the underground Cult of Kalast worshipped before
the creature was slain by a traveling knight. The dragon is incredibly
detailed, and appears alive thanks to natural heating vents beneath it that
create the wisps of steam and simulate its breathing.

The coins around the statue's base are a metallic ooze that presses
against the false dragon's sides to draw heat from the underground vents.
The ooze appears to be a mass of coins left to honor the dragon, but lashes
out at anyone coming within range.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Ooze, Undead
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attack:  Strike (2d4 plus 1d6 cold)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Engulf, skeletons
Move: 9/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

This creature appears as a large, undulating mass of black goo from
which rotted and broken bones protrude.

When an ooze moves across the grave of a restless and evil soul,
a transformation takes place. The malevolent spirit, still tied to the rotting
flesh consumed by the ooze, melds with the ooze. The result is a creature
filled with hatred of the living and an intelligence and cunningness not
normally known among its kind. The resulting undead ooze appears as a large,
undulating mass of black goo from which rotted and broken bones protrude.

The undead ooze has an advantage over any other ooze: intelligence. It
uses this new gift to its fullest in combat by attacking from surprise or by
stalking its prey and attacking when the opportunity presents itself. The
undead ooze attacks by slamming its body into its prey. It usually engulfs
its foes or expels its skeleton allies to contend with its enemies. Undead
oozes are undead and can be turned by clerics.

Although it moves slowly, an undead ooze can mow down creatures
by moving over them. It cannot make a strike during a round in which
it engulfs a creature. Targets who do not attempt to attack the ooze can
attempt a saving throw to avoid being engulfed. An engulfed creature
automatically takes strike damage each round.

Each round, in place of moving or striking, an undead ooze can expel
1d6 skeletons from its mass. Skeletons can act in the round they are
expelled. Slain skeletons are engulfed by the undead ooze and can be
reanimated and expelled again in 1 hour.

Credit: The Undead Ooze originally appeared in Sword & Sorcery Studios’
Creature Collection (© Sword & Sorcery Studios, 2000) and is used by
permission. It has been modified from the original.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Sword
& Sorcery Studios.

Just a Direction
You enter a chamber in the dungeon that is quite nondescript save
for a large clockwork mechanism that takes up the center of the room.
The mechanism consists of a number of gears and shafts connected to
a spherical clock - that is to say, a sphere, half black, half white, with
each side marked with twelve Roman numerals in brass. A stationary
pointer indicates the time, the black and white sides of the rotating sphere
indicate whether the time is A.M. or P.M. Atop the sphere there is the
form of a squatting demon, also in brass.

The demon is animated, sentient and quick to strike up a conversation
with visitors. It will claim that it can answer any question posed to it, but
only at the appointed time (which will always be midnight). Any attempt
to force information from the demon will end in a mild scolding, a wide,
toothy grin and an admonition to return at midnight.

The demon is capable of answering most questions via a legend lore
effect that it can evoke once per day. In truth, it can do this at any time,
but prefers midnight, for that is when an undead ooze seeps slowly from
the walls of the clock chamber. While adventurers’ attentions are on the
demon, the ooze can strike, entertaining the demon to no end.

Ooze, Vampiric
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attack:  Strike (2d4 plus level drain)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Level drain, create spawn, split, sunlight
vulnerability
Move: 6/6 (climbing)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

Some think the vampiric ooze was created by a lich using ancient and
forbidden magic. Others believe the vampiric ooze was formed when
an ochre jelly slew a vampire and absorbed it. Whatever the monster's
origins, it looks like a thick, bubbling pool of mustard yellow muck. It
can alter its shape so as to appear up to 12 feet long and 6 inches thick; it
can also compress its body to slip through cracks as small as 1 inch wide.
It spends its time slithering along floors, walls, and ceilings, or if above
ground, hunting its prey at night.

The ooze's attacks drain one level unless the victim of the attack passes
a saving throw. Any humanoid slain by a vampiric ooze becomes a
zombie in 1d4 rounds. Spawn are under the command of the vampiric
ooze that created them and remain enslaved until its death. They do not
possess any of the abilities they had in life. For each such level drained,
the vampiric ooze gains 1 Hit Dice.

Cold and electricity deal no damage to a vampiric ooze. Instead they
cause the monster to split into two identical oozes, each with half of the
original's current hp (round down). A vampiric ooze with 10 hit
points or less cannot be further split. Exposing a vampiric ooze to direct
sunlight destroys it utterly if it cannot escape in one round.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Life Sucker
Your travels through the crooked woods bring you to the foot of a steep
hill. Atop the hill there is the remains of a fortified temple that shows signs
of a terrible and very hot fire. The ceiling of the temple has collapsed,
taking much of the walls with it and leaving little more than a pile of
rubble and melted metal.
Beneath the temple there is a crypt, once home to the vampire that
seized the temple from an overconfident high priest (her husband) who
sought to found a community of believers to extend the sway of Law into
the chaotic wilderness.
After the fall of the bishop, his followers fled. In due time, a force of
religious knights found their way to the temple and entered it intent on
stamping out the curse of vampirism. As a result of their fight, the temple
was burned and collapsed. The knights never left the temple, of course.
Expecting a vampire, they were not prepared for the vampiric ooze that
fell upon them as they threw open the vampire's casket and found it
empty.
The vampiric ooze still dwells beneath the temple, oozing out of the
rubble every so often to hunt. Beneath the rubble, in the crypt, one might
find all that remains of the nine knights - their scorched platemail, melted
holy symbols pressed to the cuirasses. In a secret cache beneath the casket
there is 1d4 x 10,000 sp, 1d3 x 1,000 gp and a slender terracotta flask of
sandalwood oil worth 200 gp.

ORCS

Orc tribes are feared and reviled throughout the planes for their depravities
and their penchant for destruction and mindless violence. The vast majority of
orcs are easy enough to identify by their jutting jaw, yellowed tusks,
squinting eyes and hairy, brutally muscular frames. Their skin color tends to
run the gamut from blue-black to grey, with putrid slime green being the most
common. Many tribes of orcs however have adopted traits unique to their own
species through interbreeding with other races, adaptation to climate and
terrain, and the intervention of evil magicians or other-planar powers.

Orc, Black
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: Weapon, usually flail (two-handed) (1d8) or twohanded sword (1d10)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A head taller and slightly more intelligent than an ordinary orc, these
foul brutes move in daylight as well as they do the darkness of their
subterranean lairs. (They do not have the light sensitivity penalty normal
orcs suffer).

Copyright Notice: Author Casey Christofferson.

Orc, Black-High Priest of Orcus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: Weapon, usually flail (two-handed) (1d8) or twohanded sword (1d10)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Spells
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

These black orcs are the undisputed leaders of massive orc tribes. Black
orc high priests cast spells as 10th-level clerics.

Copyright Notice: Author Casey Christofferson.

The Siege Machine
A black iron juggernaut rolls through the forest just seven leagues
outside the city walls. Its three-story walls are broken only by arrow slits
near the crenellated roof. Bleached white skulls linked by iron chains
decorate the sides. Two massive iron plated doors remain closed on the
face of the iron behemoth, presumably concealing a battering ram. Two
great smoke stacks bellow oily soot from its top. Two huge ballistae on
swivel mounts are loaded with barbed spears. Long chains with hooks
drag corpses from a recent siege.
The juggernaut is powered by the steam created by two enslaved fire
elementals trapped within the boiler. Two dozen black orcs operate the
machine, decimating all in its path. They use the juggernaut to attack
defenseless villages and settlements.
Cyrene, a human high priestess of Orcus, holds an uncanny influence
over the orcs as she commands the troops and controls the juggernaut.
As a young lithe human with delicate features, she makes a stark contrast
with her brutish crew.

Orc, Blood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: Weapon, usually large two-handed axe (1d10)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Frenzy
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A typical male blood orc stands over 6 feet tall and weighs around 200
pounds. Blood orcs’ skin is dark reddish-black and their hair is black,
dark brown, or crimson. A blood orc who smells or tastes blood (even
his own) during combat flies into a frenzy and adds +2 to his attack rolls.
Like normal orcs, they fight with a -1 to-hit penalty in sunlight.

Copyright Notice: Author Casey Christofferson.

To the Victors
In a remote corner of the known lands, smoke rises in large columns
into the cloudless sky. A gnoll village once stood along a rocky creek
bank. Piles of burning gnoll corpses surround the smoldering village.
Severed gnoll heads are impaled on long spears embedded into the sward.
Most of the huts are burnt ruins, and gore and blood coat the ground.
Two dozen blood orcs stand as victors amid the carnage. The orcs
rummage through the spoils and ravage the gnoll survivors and slaves.
The blood orcs are led by Two-Stump, a plump biclops. He carries a twohanded sword in each hand and a loaded ballista on his back.

Orc, Ghost-Faced
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: Weapon, usually large axe or two-handed sword
(1d10)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Invisible in shadows
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Ghost-faced orc are normal orcs that paint their faces with grotesque
skull-like patterns. Whenever a ghost-faced orc stands still or moves
slowly in shadows or darkness, it is essentially invisible. Their face paint
makes them appear to be floating disembodied skulls. Like normal orcs,
they fight with a -1 to-hit penalty in sunlight.

Copyright Notice: Author Casey Christofferson.

The Graves of Stone
Two rows of graves set into solid stone encircle a grotesque and
bloated statue. Four graves sit in the inner row and sixteen in the outer.
The graves are six feet by four feet wide holes cut three feet deep into
solid rock. Each has a heavy stone lid lying atop it. The aged statue
depicts Orcus grinning down upon the graves. Eight ghost-faced orcs
guard the statue and the interred. Occasionally, a ranking priest of
Orcus communes here to bask in the statue's presence. Panicked
screams, pounding and scratching come from five graves. Fingers jut
through small air holes in the stone lids.

Faithful of Orcus travel from afar to worship at this shrine. For many, it is
the next and last step in their testament of devotion to the undead lord. The
faithful sacrifice themselves by twos. Two unclothed and weaponless
individuals lie down in the stone grave as the ghost-faced orcs seal them in
with the stone lid. The sacrifices fight to the death inside the grave. The
victor remains in the grave until death, surviving until his last moments on
by consuming the flesh and drinking blood of his victim. Once the victor
perishes, he returns as a ghoul, which the ghost-face orcs release into the
world.

Orc, Greenskin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: Weapon, usually spear (1d6) or scimitar (1d8) or
short bow (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Thieving abilities
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Wiry and quick, these slime-green orcs have long ears, smallish tusks,
and coyote-like eyes. They shoot first and eat later. Greenskins are
arboreal hunters with limited thieving abilities. They can use Climb Walls
(86%); Hear Sounds (3 in 6); Hide in Shadows (15%); and Move Silently
(25%). Greenskin orcs do not suffer any ill effects in sunlight like normal
orcs.

Copyright Notice: Author Casey Christofferson.

Salt Mines
A young forest grows in the rich soil of a former lake. A massive
sinkhole swallowed the water in the lake years ago, leaving a massive
rocky gash in the ground. The trees reach a height of only 50 feet and the
ground is soft and spongy. Methane seeping from the hole fills the forest
with a horrible stench. The canyon-like sinkhole drops 150 feet into a
seemingly endless natural borehole. The lakebed is filled with a bounty
of quality salt crystals.

A tribe of greenskin orcs lays claim to the salt. Slaves mine the salt
and the orcs then trade with local merchants to distribute the valued
commodity. A 20-foot-tall wooden palisade built by the greenskin orcs
surrounds the 300-foot-wide canyon. Six 30-foot-tall wooden towers
overlook the saltpit and the surrounding woods. The canyon immediately
drops away behind the wall. Wood, thatch and mud dwellings line the
walls of the pit and provide shelter for the orcs and slaves. Wooden
ramps, ladders and scaffolding line the cliff walls, providing access to the
levels of the mine.

Bubbling pools of mud surround the wooden wall. These mud bubbles
grow in massive mounds of hardened suds as the mud dries and traps the
methane gas. The greenskin orcs discovered that flaming arrows ignite
these mounds into fireball-like explosions. The damage dealt is relative
to the size of the frothy mounds.

Orog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Battleaxe (1d8+1) or javelin (1d4+1)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Orogs, also called elite orcs or greater orcs, are the much larger kin
of normal orcs. They usually reach well over 6 feet tall but closely
resemble normal orcs in all ways except build: orogs are much stronger
and stockier. It is believed that orogs are the result of the union of a male
orc and female ogre.

In contrast to lesser orcs, orogs are highly disciplined and straightforward.
Orogs within an orc community quickly rise to leadership positions within
their clan, although in orc armies the orogs will segregate themselves into
all-orog military units. Orog military units are highly organized, tactically
superior, and far more dangerous than those of normal orcs. Such orog
units form the vanguard of the army to which they belong. Orogs do not
separate themselves into their own clans, despite their tendency to selfsegregate while in an orc army. Orogs wear platemail and carry large axes
or swords.

Orogs speak orc, and about 25% master the common tongue, although
their inflection often makes it appear every statement they make is posed
as a question.

Credit: The Orog originally appeared in the Second Edition Monstrous
Compendium I (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1989) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by Wizards of the Coast.

Lost Morale
The mountainous district you have wandered into is crawling with
squads of orogs (1d10+10 in each, plus two 3 HD sergeants and one 5
HD lieutenant). There are a total of four roaming squads; encounters with
them occur on a roll of 1-2 on 1d6 made each day and each night. The
squads are attached to a besieging army that has cut off a stronghold built
to hold a high mountain pass. The main army is encamped around the
stronghold on the edges of a rocky meadow. The camp consists of leather
tents and a number of timber and stone buildings hastily constructed to
house supplies and officers. The main force consists of 2d4 x 10 warriors.
There is one 3 HD sergeant per 10 warriors, five 5 HD lieutenants and
three 7 HD captains. The orog warriors wear blackened chainmail and
are armed with a variety of weapons. About 25% of the force is made
up of crossbowmen (heavy crossbow, hand axe), 50% are heavy infantry
(shield, pole arm, dagger) and the remainder sappers (pick and battle axe).
As is typical with the orcish races, the orogs are easily focused on
killing, but tend to fall to infighting when forced to wait. Hurling stones
from onagers and the odd raid into the countryside has not been enough
to satisfy their lust for battle, and the camp is now divided into three
camps, each based around its captain and existing in a tenuous peace with
its rivals. The folk inside the stronghold are on the brink of surrender,
with only their fear of the what the orogs will do to them keeping them
throwing open their gates.

Paleoskeleton, Triceratops
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 0 [19] front, 5[14] back
Attacks: 1 gore (4d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fossilize, charge, roar
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

A paleoskeleton triceratops is the fossilized remains of a long-dead
dinosaur. The triceratops uses its horns to attack, and does double damage
while charging. Once every 1d4 rounds, a paleoskeleton can turn any
creature to stone with a successful strike (save resists). Once every other
round, a paleoskeleton triceratops can unleash an eerie roar that causes
creatures with fewer Hit Dice than the triceratops to flee in terror (as
per a fear spell). Other types of prehistoric paleoskeleton dinosaurs are
believed to exist.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

No Bones About It
Deep in the southern jungles lies the fabled Bone Fortress of Danok
Toh. The warlike indigenous tribes of the deep jungle unite against
common foes behind the petrified bone walls of the massive stronghold.
The ancient shaman Iztalkus rules the tribes with necromantic power,
plant-imbued apes and hordes of juju zombies.

The petrified bones of thousands of dinosaurs line the stone walls of
the fortress, some of the skeletons’ bones jutting from the stone. One half
of a triceratops skull adorns each of the front gates. The skull becomes
complete when the doors are shut. At Iztalkus’ command, the skull and
some of the bones forming the gate step forth as paleoskeleton triceratops.

Pech
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Heavy pick (1d4+1)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Spells, stone knowledge, immunity to petrification,
magic resistance (30%), light blindness
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality (lawful tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A pech is a fey creature believed to have its origins on the Elemental
Plane of Earth. On the Material Plane, pechs dwell deep underground in
places rarely even seen by dwarves, drow, or other subterranean races.
They are excellent stonemasons and are sometimes employed by other
subterranean races for their skill at stoneworking (if such subterranean
races can actually find the pech's lair). They are generally an isolated race
and rarely venture far from their lairs.

Pechs never wear armor and most are arrayed in nothing more than a
simple loincloth of brown or black fur. They stand as tall as a dwarf and
have gangly arms and legs, broad hands and ochre-colored skin. Pech are
universally bald and their large, bulbous eyes are stark white without any
discernable pupils.

Pechs speak their own language, and some speak the languages of
dwarves, gnomes, goblins and kobolds as well.

Pech are immune to all petrifying effects, such as a gorgon's breath,
medusa's gaze or a flesh to stone spell. They are mastr masons and
miners, and their extensive knowledge of stone gives them a +1 bonus to
hit and damage against creatures made of stone or earth. Four times per
day, a pech can cast stone shape and stone tell. Once per day, four pechs
working together can cast wall of stone. Eight pechs working together can
cast conjuration of earth elemental once per day.

Abrupt exposure to bright light blinds a pech for 1 round.

Credit: The Pech originally appeared in S4 Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/
Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Antigravity Ore
In the deeper portions of a dungeon a band of delvers might come across
what looks like a subterranean canal. The canal is about three feet wide
and five feet high and runs at a slope of 20-degrees.

The “canal” is actually an aquifer constructed by a tribe of 1d20+20
pech miners and 1d10+10 pech females. The pech live about 2 miles
away, the aquifer flowing into their stronghold from above. The aquifer
runs through a stone lattice and down a 40-foot channel into a shallow
pool that is also fed by three other aquifers. The pool is used by the pech
for fishing, the gathering of molds and fungi and bathing.

The pool chamber is about forty feet in diameter. Two bridges arch
over the pool, leading into long, low-ceilinged chambers used as living
quarters, dining halls and kitchen facilities by the females of the tribe.
The females live with their sisters and mother in these chambers, meeting
their husbands only rarely in one of a dozen pleasant, secret grottos
beneath the earth.

A number of ladders in the pool chamber lead up to the mine shafts
where the males reside. The shafts are closed by heavy stone doors. The
males live with their brothers and father in the shafts where they mine
the deep earth for kavorite. The unrefined kavorite is unusually light; the
metal's anti-gravity properties do not surface until it is refined by a skilled
alchemist. The pech trade their kavorite with gnomes for foodstuffs and
gems.

The total treasure of the pech consists of 1d10 pounds of hickory nuts
(worth 200 gp per pound), 1d20 pounds of fagara (worth 100 gp per
pound, 3d6 pounds of pistachios (worth 15 gp per pound), 1d10 sides of
beef crusted with salt (worth 15 gp each), 1d6 terracotta icons depicting
Ptah (worth 75 gp each), a silver and brass waist (worth 190 gp), a silver
tiara worth 600 gp and a turquoise turtle (worth 20 gp).

Phantasm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: Incorporeal touch (1d6 + level drain)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Level drain (1 level) with hit
Move: 9/15 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Phantasms appear as translucent humanoid-shaped creatures with
faintly discernable facial features resembling a human face twisted and
corrupted by evil. Hair, if present, is formed of the immaterial stuff the
phantasm is composed of. Their arms are long and thin and end in wisps
of the very stuff they are made of. Likewise, their lower torso trails off
into the same misty substance. The touch of a phantasm drains one level
from living creatures.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Giving up the Ghost
A leprous stranger moves jerkily out of the Tallowstack Graveyard, his
eyes wide and his mouth opening and closing silently. His clothes are
torn and dirty, and his skin is sallow and sunken, his flesh hanging off
his bones. Clumps of his hair are yanked out by the roots. Just three days
ago the man weighed more than 300 pounds; he's now under 100. PCs
looking in the direction he points see a yellowish glow rising from a crypt
within the graveyard. The yellow light is a magical field that traps victims
who enter it in a short stasis unless they save to avoid the effect. Dust and
insects fly slowly through the wavering light, as if underwater.
Takaal Reel is a shell of his former self since he cut through the
graveyard late one night and was possessed by a phantasm. The creature
rides in the poor man now, draining his life. The phantasm knows poor
Takaal won’t last much longer, and is eager to find a new host. It has
just a few hours remaining before Takaal dies. The phantasm is eager to
find a new host before that time, and hopes to lure a PC into the ancient
graveyard to switch bodies.

Phantom
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Phantoms are translucent spirits of creatures that died a particularly
violent death. A phantom appears much as it did in life, though its form is
clearly translucent and incorporeal. Phantoms have no attack form other
than causing fear. A phantom causes fear (by gaze) to any living creature
within 30 feet of it (saving throw negates). Affected creatures flee in terror
for 1d6 rounds. If the save is successful, that creature cannot be affected
again by that phantom's fear for one day. A phantom is immune to all attack
forms but can be destroyed through the casting of a dispel evil spell.

Phantom Treasure
In a crossroads of the dungeon you discover an iron chest, the surface of
which it pitted and marred. About 30 feet away from the chest there is a skeleton
that looks as though its clothing and leather armor was dissolved by acid. The
acid is actually a trap activated by opening the chest, which is locked. The acid
pours from the joints between the stones that make up the arched ceiling. If a
person fails their saving throw, the acid pours on him and causes 1d6 points
of damage per round until washed away with at least 1 gallon of water. To
make matters worse, the skeleton's spirit now occupies the area as a phantom,
making it difficult for adventurers to get through the intersection. The chest is,
unfortunately, empty save for a gold filling from a tooth (worth 5 gp).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Harold
Johnson and Tom Moldvay.

Credit: The Phantom originally appeared in the First Edition module A2 Secret
of the Slavers Stockade (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and later

Phantom Stalker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 burning claws (1d4 plus burn)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Burn, death throes, find target, flames of healing,
immunity to fire, polymorph, double damage from cold
Move: 12/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

Phantom stalkers live in the Elemental Plane of Fire. In its true form, a
phantom stalker appears as a column of fire. It can take a human-shaped form,
appearing as a muscular, fiery red humanoid about 8 feet tall. A phantom
stalker rarely enters the Material Plane on its own. If encountered, it is usually
in the employ of a spellcaster that has summoned it there to do his bidding. A
phantom stalker can be summoned using a summon monster IV spell.
Anyone touching (or touched by) a phantom stalker must succeed on
a saving throw or take an extra 1d6 points of damage as clothes ignite
or armor becomes searing hot. The damage continues for another 1d4+4
rounds after the phantom stalker's last successful attack. Phantom
stalkers can also ignite flammable materials with a touch. Once per day, a
phantom stalker can alter its form per the polymorph self spell.
Any magical attack against a phantom stalker that deals fire damage
heals 1 point of damage for every 3 points of damage it would otherwise
deal. If the amount of healing would cause the phantom stalker to exceed
its full normal hp, it gains any excess as temporary hp that
last the remainder of the battle.
A phantom stalker reduced to 0 hp or less expels a fiery blast
equivalent to a six dice fireball to all creatures within 20 feet. A saving throw
reduces the damage by half. A phantom stalker never uses this ability if it
would harm the one that summoned it, unless the summoner itself is to blame
for the phantom stalker's destruction (i.e., if the summoner attacks the stalker
or orders it into battle against opponents that clearly outmatch it).
If the one who summoned the phantom stalker is slain while the stalker is on
the Material Plane, the stalker can unerringly find the slayer. Once the slayer

has been tracked and dealt with, the phantom stalker returns to its home plane.

Biding Time
It is a little known fact that many of the stars in the night sky are actually
portals into the Elemental Plane of Fire. Around one such star in the sky
there orbit dozens of large chunks of basalt. The largest of these was
recently the scene of a terrible fight between rival wizards. In the course
of their invocations and conjurations, one summoned into existence a
phantom stalker. The other froze that stalker in place, giving her time to kill
her rival and escape into the Astral Plane. The phantom stalker now sits and
broods, calculating whether or not a leap into the star will bring him home.
This whole situation would
mean next to nothing to your
adventurers, save for the fact
that the wizard in question holds
an object of great value to the
adventurers, and any attempt
to locate that object by magical
means will lead them to the chunk
of basalt and the phantom stalker.

Credit: The Phantom Stalker originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian
Livingstone.

Flea, Giant Phase
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5 hp
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d3 + blood drain)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Blood drain, disease, leap, phase shifting
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

A giant phase flea is about 1 foot long, with an oval flattened body. The
insects live on the blood of warm-blooded animals. Up to three times per
day, a phase flea can leap up to three times its Move rate. Phase fleas can
shift out of phase with their surroundings (so they can be attacked only
be ethereal creatures), only to come back into phase later for an attack.
If a giant phase flea hits with a bite attack, it latches on to automatically
drain the victim's blood (1d4 points of damage) in the next round. After
it drains 4 total hp, it leaps away to digest its meal. There is a 5%
chance that a giant phase flea carries a disease.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Caught in the Mists
A swirling mist of ghostly vapors spins in the center of this small stone
chamber. The vapors appear about a foot above the stone floor and end
just short of the 10-foot-high ceiling. The mist is about three foot wide in
the middle, and tapers at either end. Colors flash throughout the mist, and
anyone staring into the vapors starts seeing scenes of his life playing out.
The PC must save or become entranced by these images.
The mists are a shimmering portal to another plane that never fully
closed. PCs can’t travel to this empty void, but creatures on the other side
don’t have any trouble getting through. Four rounds after PCs enter the
room, 10 phase fleas leap from the mists to attack.

Phasma
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: Incorporeal touch (1d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: magical powers, create images
Move: 6/9 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A phasma is a floating semi-transparent humanoid dressed in grayish
robes. Its face is either nonexistent or concealed behind a translucent gray
mask. A faint pulsating white light surrounds its form. Twice per day,
a phasma can create a phantasmal force of the most fearsome creature
imaginable to each subject within 30 feet. At will, a phasma can detect
good. Three times per day, it can dispel magic.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

All In Your Mind
The downward sloping tunnel empties into a nightmare of a chamber
that is 30 feet wide by 70 feet long. The stone room's gray walls are
covered in white scratches, as if someone dragged long fingernails down
the rough bricks. The ceiling 10 feet overhead is covered in jagged mirror
shards that reflect the floor one moment, then change to show a hellish
chamber of fire pits where dead figures walk unheeded. Figures reach out
of the floor, their faces pressed against the stones, and their arms reaching
upward and clutching at freedom from the rock.
In the middle of the room, a pair of arms drops from the ceiling. Tied
to the fingers of this set of hands are black threads supporting a twisted
marionette dressed in an orange-and-yellow diamond-pattern outfit. The
puppet's head is downcast, and the thing hangs five feet above the floor.
The face is white and the eyes are sunken red orbs. Its lips are painted a
midnight black.
At the far end of the room, a chair is turned away from PCs, although
the top of the head of an old man with long wisps of gray hair can be seen.
If PCs approach the chair, the hands reaching from the stone floor grasp
at their legs to hold them in place. Shards of mirror fall from the ceiling
to slice at their flesh. And the marionette dances and sways as if alive,
then laughs at struggling PCs. The chair slowly rotates to face PCs, as a
sibilant voice whispers their names. The old man in the chair is a corpse,
his eyes gone and his mouth hanging open.
The entire chamber is a phantasmal force cast by a phasma residing in
the corpse. The phasma waits for PCs to approach before it leaps from the
old man to attack.

Phlogiston
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 4 tendrils (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Fire bolt, grab, death throes, resist fire
Move: 0 (immobile)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The phlogiston bush (known as a fire shrub by some sages) is an
immobile plant found only in temperate regions. It resembles an ordinary
shrub or bush with long leaves of silvery-green scattered sparsely across
several small and twisted branches of brownish-green. Phlogiston bushes
gain nourishment from the body fluids and organs of living creatures. The
plant sends out tendrils to grab prey, then holds on while it digests the
victim. If two tendrils hit the same victim, the plant grabs the creature and
holds it, automatically inflicting 1d6 points of damage. Once every 1d4
rounds, the phlogiston bush can release a tiny bolt of fire in a 40-foot line
that deals 2d4 points of fire damage (save for half). When reduced to 0
hp, a phlogiston bush explodes in a concussive blast that deals 4d6
damage in a 10-foot radius (save for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Ignominious Assault
The Muricee Forest is thick with old timber and clinging vines. Animals
scamper through the dense underbrush, and birds build large nests in the
upper branches of the pines and termite-eaten elms. About an hour into the
forest, the ground is scorched, and the remains of a small shack sit in an
overgrown clearing. All that remains of the building are the burned stones
forming its foundation, and heaps of charred wood collapsed on itself. A
skeleton lies amid the clumps of burnt wood, its blackened bones broken
and scattered. A rickety outhouse stands off to the edge of the clearing, its
wooden door hanging slightly ajar. Inside the outhouse is a single hole cut
through a wooden plank. Living in the smelly hole beneath the outhouse
is a phlogiston bush that is barely getting by. The plant grew in the richly
fertilized soil, but barely gets any light because of the outhouse above
and the trees growing thickly around the clearing. The plant subsists
on mice and other small animals that wander into the hole. The hungry
plant shoots a fire bolt up through at anyone relieving themselves before
sending its tendrils up to drag them down into the muck.

Phooka
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d3)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Alterate form, magical powers, tree stride, spell
resistance (16%)
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A phooka is a small hairy creature resembling a cross between a goblin
and a child's fuzzy play bear. Phookas have wide-set, glowing, golden
eyes and long, pointed ears like those of a donkey. They have a mouth
to match their ears, complete with buck teeth. Phookas are tricksters and
jokesters that revel in playing tricks on unwary travelers. A phooka's
trickery may include turning itself into an enchanted pony and offer a
stranger a ride, only to lead it through brambles and thorns at top speed,
or to lead travelers to enchanted springs that cause them to fall into deep
slumber and strip them of all their belongings and clothes, then leave
behind clues as to where their possessions are hidden. A phooka can
assume the shape of a mountain lion or wolf. They can create dancing
lights three times per day. A phooka can enter a tree and move from it to
another tree within 50 feet.

A Life of Jest
Ten-year-old Myrtie Mae is missing, and the only clue is
a note in her room reading “I have the girl.”
At first, her parents thought it was another of the endless
pranks she and her “invisible friend” like to pull. They
both remembered the time little Myrtie found a pony and
took it to a friend's birthday party – and the horse charged
across the field with the screaming boy clinging to its back.
Or the time Myrtie said wanted to live in a pink house – and
someone painted the house a phosphorescent salmon overnight.
But things became more serious when the girl didn’t return last night.
Neighbors are confused and scared. PCs who help search find odd clues
about town: Giant footprints lead from the girl's window into trees, but
vanish in the fresh loam between the oaks. A yellow sign on a small
pole asks “Which way now?” Other signs say “That way” while more
read “No, that way” with an arrow pointing in the opposite direction.
One yellow sign simply points up … straight at a hornet's nest. Another
points down, into waist-deep mud. A statue in town holds one of the girl's
blonde pigtails.
Myrtie Mae is indeed with her mischievous invisible friend, a phooka
named Jest. She's safe and sound in his burrow as the townspeople traipse
through the forest looking for her. Jest pulls tricks on the searchers, then
comes back to tell Myrtie about all the fun he's having. Myrtie plans to
return home soon and slip into bed, although Jest puts a bucket of glue
and feathers on top of the door to her room as one last joke.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Phycomid
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Fluid globule (1d6 acid plus spore infection)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Acid, spore infection
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

feet wet, assuming they can leap about five feet from island to island.
The copper cavern is, in fact, an artificial construct. The walls are about
one foot thick. It is located a larger cavern, such that knocking on a wall
will produce a loud sound that echoes and reverberates for at least an hour.
The middle island in the cavern is inhabited by a patch of 1d3+1 phycomids
growing on the remains of a dwarf. The dwarf still wears an amulet of
protection from evil with a very basic map scratched into its reverse.

A patch of phycomids is often found growing in garbage heaps, refuse,
and other such places. A typical patch of phycomid covers an area of 2
feet. The actual number of mushroom-growths varies with the actual size
of the patch. The mushroom caps are usually white, red, purple, or yellow
in color, and the phycomid's body is milky white.
The phycomid attacks by extruding a small tube from its body and firing
a glob of acid at a foe. The phycomid has a range increment of 5 feet and
can fire a globule to a maximum range of 20 feet.
A creature hit by a phycomid's fluid globule attack must succeed on a saving
throw or lose 1d2 points of constitution as tiny mushroom-like growths sprout
from its body. Each turn (10 minutes) thereafter, until the victim receives
a cure disease spell, he loses 1 point of constitution. At constitution 0, the
victim dies and his body collapses to the ground, sprouting a new phycomid.
Lost points of constitution return at the rate of 1 per day of rest.

The Phycomid originally appeared in Dragon #68 (© TSR/Wizards of
the Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Credit: Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by
Gary Gygax.

Dungeoneer's Foot
The passage you are traversing runs into a large, hollow cavern, the
walls of which appear to be cast from copper. The cavern is filled with
brackish water and four “islands” of reddish stone allow one to pass from
one side of the cavern to the exit on the other side without getting their

Piercer
Piercers resemble 1-foot long stalactites and are found underground in
caves and caverns hanging from the ceiling waiting for living creatures to
pass underneath. Those viewing a piercer have a 1 in 8 chance to discern
its true nature (1 in 6 for dwarves); else it is overlooked and mistaken for
a normal stalactite. Piercers gather in clusters of up to 20 creatures.
When a living creature stands in a square directly below a piercer, it
drops and attempts to impale the unsuspecting foe. The creature can make
a saving throw to avoid the piercer's attack. If the save fails, the target
sustains 1d6 points of damage. If the save succeeds, the piercer misses
its target and may not attack again until it climbs back into position.
(Piercers have a move of 3). A piercer on the ground is easily dispatched,
though touching or attacking it unarmed or with natural weapons causes
it to secrete an acid that deals 1d4 points of acid damage to the opponent
each time one of its attacks hits.
Piercers can grow to a length of 6 feet. Those of 2 to 4 feet in length deal
2d6 points of damage (plus 1d6 acid damage). Those of 5 to 6 feet deal
3d6 points of damage (plus 1d6 acid damage) if they hit.

Credit: The Piercer originally appeared in the Strategic Review #3 (© TSR/
Wizards of the Coast, 1975) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

That's Gotta Hurt
An underground chasm in a limestone cavern is spanned by a natural
bridge of pinkish stone. The stone is damp from water dripping from
stalactites overhead. The chasm is filled with a torrent of icy water that
flows from higher caverns. Among the stalactites hanging over the bridge,
which is about 6 feet wide and 36 feet long, there are 1d10+8 piercers. If
one looks over the bridge into the torrent of water, they might notice the
shells of a few pierces washed up on the sides, but otherwise must rely
on their dungeoncraft to warn them of the danger of crossing the bridge.

Pit Hag
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 14
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 claws (2d8) and bite (1d8), or pitchfork (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Rend, spells, +1 magic weapons to hit, poison,
immune to fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

A pit hag is a 6-foot-tall female humanoid with crimson red skin, small
upward pointing horns of golden-red and eyes the color of the fires of
Hell. Its hands and feet end in wickedly sharp curved claws and its mouth
is filled with razor-sharp fangs that they constantly lick with their forked
black tongues. A pit hag has a small barbed tail. Pit hags attack with their
claws or a wicked curved pitchfork. If she hits with both claws, the victim
is held and the pit hag inflicts automatic damage with its claws and bites
thereafter. Pit hags cast spells as an 11th-level Magic-User.

Dipped in Pain
The locked iron door to this chamber radiates unnatural warmth. The
120-foot-diameter room beyond resembles an image from hell. Five-footsquare marble flagstones encircle a 20-foot-diameter dais. The flagstones
are composed of alternating bands of red and black tiles. The floor looks
like a round chess board with the dais in the center. Evenly dispersed
within each ring are five-foot-square pits set in the floor. There are seven
bands of alternating red-and-black flagstones with four pits in all but the
outer ring for a total of 24 pits. The pits contain:

Ring 1 (innermost): Fire, 1d6 points of damage.
Ring 2: Acid, 2d4 points of damage.
Ring 3: Oscillating spikes, 2d6 points of damage.
Ring 4: Grinding iron gears, 4d4 points of damage.
Ring 5: Whirling razor blades, 4d6 points of damage.
Ring 6: Green slime
Ring 7 (outermost): No pits.

Attached to a chain above each pit hangs a barely living human, elf or dwarf
secured in locked manacles. The chains extend into holes in the ceiling. Once
a ring on the floor (starting with the outer perimeter ring) is breached, the
chains in the next inner ring begin dropping victims sequentially into the pit
below them, one each round (determined randomly).  Waving a hand, shooting an
arrow or casting a spell over the floor ring releases a victim into the pit
below and starts the process in motion. Any movement over the ring releases
the chain so flying, jumping or climbing sets off the trap.  Mostly commoners,
the hanging victims instantly die horrible deaths once dropped into the pits.
Helping the victims in any ring immediately starts the process in the next
ring moving toward the dais.

In addition to torture devices, the dais holds an iron mechanism with levers
and chains that extend into the ceiling above. This machine controls the
chains to the hanging prisoners. Two obese black orc torturers carrying hooked
halberds attend a pit hag who lounges on the dais. She cackles gleefully
whenever anyone drops into a pit.

Only one of the prisoners has any experience as an adventurer. A
bewildered dwarf located in the innermost ring is known as “The Baker
of Molnar.” He can survive a few rounds in the fire pit. He has neither
baking skills nor any emotions to speak of. He simply follows orders and
replies in vague disconnected thoughts.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Plant-Imbued Ape
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: +1 magic weapon needed to hit, magic resistance
(10%), regenerate, vulnerable to acid and fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A plant-imbued ape is a plant-like creature that assumes an animal
shape. They act like standard apes. While in contact with the earth, they
can regenerate 3 hp per round as they draw new plants into their
body to repair damage. The plant creatures can even regrow lopped-off
heads and limbs. The only way to utterly kill a plant-imbued ape is to
submerse it in acid or burn it. Through ancient rituals, elder druids can
create diverse plant-imbued creatures.


The Entwining Temple
Legends from prehistoric times tell of the sacrifice of the virgin princess
at the Hot Gates of Bythunova to appease the gods. But the gods, angered
by the sacrifice of such beauty, turned the princess's corpse to jade as
the plants of the wild consumed the temple. The city and its people have
vanished with time, leaving only the remains of the temple.
A ring of vine-covered pillars topped by a roof of vegetation surrounds a
pit in the temple's center. At the bottom of the pit lies a jade statue of the
forgotten princess. A gold ceremonial dagger is imbedded in her chest.
The sentient vines grow on unhallowed ground, the tendrils slowly
growing over and consuming living creatures. The vines spawn horrific
replicas of those they consume. Currently, a band of plant-imbued gorillas
thrives in the ruins.

Copyright Notice: Author Patrick Lawinger.

Poltergeist
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  See text
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Fear, telekinesis, natural invisibility
Move: 3/6 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Poltergeists are undead spirits that haunt the area where they died. A
poltergeist has no material form and cannot manifest on the Material
Plane. Most poltergeists are evil, as they are “trapped” in the area where
they were killed and can never leave this area unless they are destroyed.
This “prison” drives them mad and they come to hate all living creatures.
Poltergeists are naturally invisible except when attacking. Their
invisibility is inherent and cannot be dispelled or negated.

A poltergeist can create a telekinetic effect to hurl one object or creature
within 10 feet to a distance of 60 feet. A creature hit by a thrown object
must succeed on a saving throw or flee in terror for 2d6 rounds. A creature
that successfully saves is immune to the fear effect of the same poltergeist
for the remainder of the encounter.

Both wild and domesticated animals can sense the unnatural presence
of a poltergeist at a distance of 30 feet. They will not willingly approach
nearer than that and panic if forced to do so; they remain panicked as long
as they are within that range.

Credit: The Poltergeist originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Lewis
Pulsipher.

Busted
A long gallery (20 feet wide, 40 feet long) in a dungeon has walls lined
with thick shelves of oak. The shelves hang from iron chains. The shelves
hold dozens of busts carved from soapstone, all of the same person, a man
with an aquiline nose, high forehead, hair pulled back into a tail and thin,
unforgiving lips. The sculptures are worth maybe 1 sp each and weight
about 5 pounds a piece.

In the center of the gallery there is a low dais, atop of which there is an
old wooden chair, battered and broken, the skeletal remains of a man (a
close inspection might convince one that it is the man in the sculptures
due to the size and shape of the forehead. Lying in front of this dais is the
skeleton of another man, pierced in the back by an arrow, a rusty chisel
covered in dried blood lying beneath one hand, a hammer beneath the
other. Pieces of an shattered busts cover the floor, from the beginning of
the gallery to the end.

The gallery was once owned by a subterranean warlord, a master of
many orc tribes who was inordinately fond of his own face. A sculptor
and amateur magic-user had the misfortune to have fallen into his hands
on his first delve and was pressed into service as his “court sculptor”. In
time, he lost his mind and killed the warlord, dying seconds afterward
by the hand of an orc archer. The orcs plundered their former master's
underground lair and left, and so were not present for his rise as a
poltergeist. The poltergeist will manifest in the center of the gallery,
above its former skeleton. Once very fond of the busts, it now finds them
excellent ammunition. A hit from a soapstone bust inflicts 1d6 points of
damage.

Proscriber
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d8+2)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Condemn, spell-like abilities, immune to poison,
resists cold, fire and electricity
Move: 6
Alignment: Any
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

A proscriber appears as an 8-foot tall warrior dressed in full
plate armor, wielding a weapon (usually a sword or mace),
and carrying a shield. Proscribers are the “messengers” of
the gods and are sent to punish a cleric who has offended
his deity. Proscribers vary in how they carry out this
sentence, but it usually involves cursing the offending
cleric (with blindness, a quest, or some other curse the
Referee can devise). If particularly vile, the proscriber
may cast finger of death or attack the cleric directly.
Once per day, the proscriber can use its condemn ability
to sever a cleric's connection to his god. If the cleric
fails a save, he immediately loses the ability to cast
spells and turn undead, and cannot be healed by any
cure spells. Proscribers have various spell-like abilities
– at will—continual light; 3/day—power word stun;
1/day—blade barrier, quest, polymorph self, power
word blind – and cast spells as a 12th-level cleric.

Little Priest, Little Priest, Let Me In
A temple sits against the hillside. The building houses a
worship room, and has a small parsonage attached to the
side. Red shingles cover the roof, and the grey stone façade
is decorated with carvings of angels in flight.
Standing on the parsonage's stone porch is a 7-foot-tall figure
wearing blood-red plate mail armor. The towering figure holds
a long sword in its gloved hand. The blade glows a sickening
green. A shield that looks like a screaming skull is strapped to the
man's forearm. His face is hidden beneath a visor of yellowed ivory fangs.
Two long horns on his helm curve from his temples and nearly touch at
the nape of his neck. The figure slams its heavy hand into the temple's oak
door so hard that the frame shakes with each resounding thump. A scared
priest inside the church screams with each pounding knock.
Anton Penn freely admits that he was an evil man in his past life. But
he's turned things around for the better after nearly being killed. He
rejected the death goddess he formerly served, and is trying to make a
new way in a life of goodness. He thought he’d gotten out of the death
cult cleanly.
But Hel had other ideas, and sent the prosciber to teach the wayward
priest a lesson for turning his back on her. Wards on the temple keep the
proscriber from simply breaking down the door, but it won’t be denied
punishing the priest – or anyone who tries to help the man.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Protector
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Longsword (1d8+1)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Air walk, spells, know alignment, telepathy 50 ft.
Move: 18
Alignment: Law
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

Protectors resemble tall, powerful humans with green eyes and bald
heads. They dress in long, flowing green robes that billow as though
blown by an invisible and unfelt breeze. They are guardians of law that
are sent to the Material Plane when the forces of chaos swing the cosmic
balance in their favor.
Protectors move by means of their air walk ability; their feet never
touch the ground, and they always float 6 to 10 inches above the ground.
All protectors can cast divine spells as a 7th level cleric. A protector
automatically knows the alignment of any creature within 50 feet that it
looks upon.

Credit: The Protector originally appeared in the First Edition module B3
Palace of the Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used
by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by Jean Wells.

Penance
A troupe of 1d6+5 protectors has been assigned to serve a 13th level
high priest of Law who has undertaken to circumnavigate the outer planes
in an effort to categorize the flora and fauna and construct a magnificent
botanical garden on the grounds of his fortress monastery. His travels are,
in part, a pennance for indiscretions that occurred in the presence of his
subordinates.
The high priest is a balding gentleman, elderly but vigorous and
handsome, with a well worn face, strong jaw and keen, golden eyes. He
wears a creaky suit of platemail and carries a leather sack and silver knife
for collecting specimens and a heavy mace +1, +3 vs. demons and +1
golden shield (capable of emiting a burst of golden light 3/day that stuns
chaotic creatures who fail a saving throw).
The high priest and his protectors travel in a curious cog of greenish
metal (kavorite) that floats about five to six feet above the ground. Much
of the deck is taken up by panes of glass, allowing light to pour into the
hold for the living specimens kept within. The high priest is especially
proud of the bright purple choke cherries he discovered on Elysium and
the flowering spurge that emits a choral hymn in the moonlight that grew
on the slopes of the Second Heaven.

Psiwyrm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7-9
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d8), 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 9, 8 or 6
Special: Breath weapon, spell-like abilities
Move: 9/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7 HD (7/600), 8 HD (8/800) or 9 HD (9/1,100)

Psiwyrms are 15 feet long with sleek, muscular bodies. Their scales
are a rich purple color, growing darker on the dragon's underside and
its clawed feet. Its mouth is filled with sharpened fangs and two large
downward curving horns protrude from its angular head. The psiwyrm's
eyes are glossy black. They breathe a cone of force, with a length of 70
feet and a base of 30 feet. Psiwyrms have a 100% chance of being able to
talk and a 50% chance of being able to cast Magic-User spells: 1d4 firstlevel, 1d3 second-level, 1d2 third-level, and 1 fourth-level spell.

Halcyon Canyons
The Halcyon Canyons serve as a pass into the heights of the Hollow
Spires Mountains. Massive quartz crystals make up the 50-foot-high
canyon walls. During the light of the midday sun, the Halcyon Canyons
fill with brilliant, scintillating colors. The prismatic colors don’t blind
creatures, but they make seeing beyond ten feet difficult without proper
eye protection. During daylight or in lighted areas, the canyon walls
reflect and refract images. Creatures passing along the canyon floor have
multiple reflections. Standing against a crystal wall acts as a mirror image
spell except the images do not go away if attacked.
The psiwyrm Cheldelic roams the canyons. It has a lair hidden behind
a heavy but movable sheet of white quartz. Cheldelic has accumulated
a large hoard of treasure from travelers as well as a hefty number of
uncut gemstones. Halcyon Canyons are also home to geons, cragmen,
caterprisms and crystallis.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Pudding, Blood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: 1 slam (2d4)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Disgorge blood, grab, immune to blunt weapons
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A blood pudding is a spheroid blob of protoplasm about 3 feet high;
they are rounded at the top, but flatten out somewhat at the bottom as their
own weight spreads out their form. The puddings are blood-red in color,
and constantly seep a foul smelling and sticky slime. In bright enough
light, blood puddings are translucent. A blood pudding strikes with a thick
pseudopod. If it strikes a victim, the blood pudding grabs the opponent
and attempts to infuse itself with the prey (save resists). If it infuses, it
attempts to disgorge the victim's blood through its pores, eyes, ears and
mouth on the next round (3d6 points of damage). Blunt weapons just
bounce off a blood pudding, doing no damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Black Skull of Kalitos
A yawning cavern of black stalactites lies in the deep tunnels beneath
the Mines of Yurith. A stream of black water flows through the cavern, the
undulating water rolling around a 20-foot-wide rock platform. Two small
wooden bridges cross the stream to the platform. Atop the platform sits a
10-foot-tall black skull carved from basalt. The skull is wide and squat,
but otherwise complete, with the jawbone resting on the rock platform.
The giant skull has two long incisors that overlap the lower teeth.
Standing around the skull are 6 black-robed figures, each bearing a staff
formed from fused leg bones. Each figure is a 6th-level cleric of Kalitos.
A bound and gagged body lies on the platform in front of the skull, held
in a small stone trough. The Cult of Kalitos routinely sacrifices captured
travelers at this profane altar to evil. An unconscious elf lies bound with
barbed wire in the trough, ready to be offered to the dark deity.
The massive skull is hollow and contains the instrument of the god's
wrath: a blood pudding. The pudding pours out of the eyes, nostrils and
from between the teeth of the black skull to devour victims in the trough.

Pudding, Brown
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attack:  Strike (2d6 plus 2d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Acid, split
Move: 6/6 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

A variety of the black pudding, the brown pudding is found only in
temperate and subtropical swamps. It is dark brown in color. The creature
secretes a digestive acid that dissolves organic material quickly, but does
not affect metal. Any melee hit or constrict attack deals acid damage, and
the opponent's clothing and armor (non-metal only) dissolve and become
useless immediately unless they succeed on saving throw. A wooden
weapon that strikes a brown pudding also dissolves immediately unless it
succeeds on a saving throw.
Slashing and piercing weapons deal no damage to a brown pudding.
Instead the creature splits into two identical puddings, each with half
of the original's current hp (round down). A pudding with 10 hit
points or less cannot be further split and dies if reduced to 0 hp.

Credit: The Brown Pudding originally appeared in the First Edition module S4
Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the
First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used
by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Black Blot on an Exemplary Q uest
In the humid grasslands of the southern continent, there is a lonely,
snowcapped mountain surrounded by miles of wetlands. The wetlands
are home to tall, blue cranes, a ragged wanderer and a cunning brown
pudding.
The ragged wanderer is an archbishop of Law that hails from the colder
northern lands. He came to the grasslands in response to a prophecy in
search of a black blot that was supposed to have fallen from the sky and
landed in these swamps. Try as he might, he has found nothing, and as
a result is going through a severe crisis of faith. The archbishop wears
rusty platemail and tattered, soiled priestly vestments, and looks more
like a wild man than a member of the lawful clergy. Encounters with
the man occur on a roll of 1 on 1d6, made each day and each night
spent traveling through the swamps. He is mildly friendly to strangers,
but maintains a healthy suspicion as well. While not averse to banding
together with others, he will almost certainly attempt to take the lead,
using the adventurers to accomplish his own ends.
The archbishop has become something of an expert at avoiding and
fighting the other main inhabitant of the marsh, the brown pudding. The
pudding appears on a roll of 6 on 1d6 when a wandering monster roll
is made. It is clever enough to use the environment to its advantage,
slinking up beneath the murky waters and engulfing a victim from below.
If challenged, the beast will attempt to flee under cover of the water,
stalking the party and sniping at them as long as they remain in the marsh.
The legendary black blot did fall in the swamp. The blot is a nexus of
anti-matter contained in a sphere of pure force. The force sphere can be
dispelled by playing a trilling rune on a flute. Should the sphere of force
disappear, the blot will begin destroying everything in its path, growing
as it does so. It grows at the rate of 1 foot per minute. It will take the blot
about 3-1/2 days to destroy an area one mile in radius.

Pudding, Dun
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attack:  Strike (2d6 plus 2d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Acid, split
Move: 6/6 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

A variety of the black pudding, the dun pudding is found only in warm,
dry, arid regions. It is light tan or brown in color. The creature secretes
a digestive acid that dissolves organic material and metal quickly, but
does not affect stone. Any melee hit or constrict attack deals acid damage,
and the opponent's armor and clothing dissolve and become useless
immediately unless they succeed on a saving throw. A metal or wooden
weapon that strikes a dun pudding also dissolves immediately unless it
succeeds on a saving throw.
Slashing and piercing weapons deal no damage to a dun pudding.
Instead the creature splits into two identical puddings, each with half
of the original's current hp (round down). A pudding with 10 hit
points or less cannot be further spit and dies if reduced to 0 hp.

Credit: The Dun Pudding originally appeared in the First Edition module S4
Lost Caverns of Tsjocanth (© TSR/ Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the
First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used
by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Can’t Get Good Help These Days
A silk caravan making its way through the desert has fallen under attack
from two separate bands of nomads. Each nomadic band is made up of
1d20+20 nomadic warriors mounted on camels. The nomads wear leather
armor and carry short bows, spears and long, slim daggers. They dress
in hooded white robes decorated with gaudy glass beads and mark their
faces with chalk. One tribe uses triangle shapes on their faces while the
other uses lines and circles. Each tribe is led by a chieftain (a fighter of
level 1d6+2) and his harem of 1d3+3 wives. The wives are all magicusers and sages of mathematics, the youngest wife being 1st level and
each additional wife being one level higher in turn. In other words, a
group of six wives will be magic-users of level 1 through 6.
In both cases, the magical wives of the tribe discovered, via their
auguries, that the caravan moving through their desert was carrying more
than silk and foodstuffs. A bronze calculation device that looks like a
series of gears within a circular case has been entrusted to the caravan
master to be transported to a center of learning on the coast.
The caravan is now hunkered down atop a large, long sand dune. Most
of its animals have been killed, and a mere ten guardsmen are still alive.
The nomads harry the guards through the day, and then press their attack
at night. By and large, the most intense night fighting is between the
nomads as they struggle for the right to steal the device.
All of this fighting and motion has now attracted a dun pudding. The
pudding slinks beneath the sands like a sidewinder, spreading itself
out just beneath the surface of the sand and wait for a victim to walk
over him. Two guardsmen have already been engulfed and digested by
the creature, and the others are arguing over whether they should kill
the caravan master, take whatever food and water they can carry, and
abandon the caravan to the nomads.

Pudding, Stone
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 slam (2d6 + acid + petrification)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Acid, petrification, immune to blunt weapons
Move: 3/3 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

A stone pudding is a large, oozing gray blob about 16 feet across and
from 2 to 4 feet thick, and weighing in excess of 20,000 pounds. A stone
pudding secretes a digestive acid that dissolves organic material and
stone, but not steel. They attack with a massive pseudopod. Anyone hit
by a stone pudding must save or be held and take automatic slam (2d6)
and acid (1d6) damage each round. The stone pudding's touch also can
turn an opponent to stone (save avoids). Fire causes a stone pudding to
split into two identical puddings with half the original's hp.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sewer Crawl
An abandoned tunnel in the sewers beneath Bargarsport is filled with
accumulated trash and detritus washed in from the Reaping Sea. A thin
stream of dirty water runs down the center of the stone floor. Brown moss
and dirty seaweed are wedged into the stone block walls. Water rises and
falls through the tunnel with the rising and ebbing tides. The stone ceiling
along a 20-foot-long section sags noticeably.
A stone pudding clings to the ceiling during the day and drops to the
sopping floor at night. The creature hunts in the narrow tunnels, slowly
flowing through the corridors after mice and other helpless sea creatures
left behind when the waters rush out of the sewers with the ebbing tides.
The creature is an opportunistic hunter and greedily drops on any creature
wandering beneath it when the tide is out.

Pudding, White
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attack:  Strike (2d6 plus 2d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Acid, split
Move: 6/6 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

A variety of the black pudding, the white pudding is found only in
cold, frigid lands. It is white in color and uses this to its advantage by
ambushing its prey. Since a white pudding looks like normal ice and snow
when at rest, it surprises prey on a roll of 1-4 on 1d6.
The creature secretes a digestive acid that dissolves organic material
quickly, but does not affect metal. Any melee hit or constrict attack deals
acid damage, and the opponent's armor (non-metal armor only) and
clothing dissolve and become useless immediately unless they succeed
on a saving throw. A wooden weapon that strikes a white pudding also
dissolves immediately unless it succeeds on a saving throw.
Slashing and piercing weapons deal no damage to a white pudding.
Instead the creature splits into two identical puddings, each with half
of the original's current hp (round down). A pudding with 10 hit
points or less cannot be further split and dies if reduced to 0 hp.

Credit: The White Pudding originally appeared in the First Edition module S4
Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1982) and later in the
First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used
by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Frozen Dinner
In a far northern trading center there is a small but respected university.
While its chancellor, the archbishop, has taken a leave of absence, leaving
it in the charge of the vice chancellor, an ambitious man descended from
minor (and cash strapped) nobility.
The university consists of three long, two-story buildings of whitish
stone with slate roofs. The largest of these three buildings was once the
property of a master thief, serving as the headquarters for his gang of
cutthroats and smugglers. Concealed passages, mostly bricked up, lead
into dank catacombs beneath the building. These catacombs were used to
store stolen loot, make quick escapes and to each a sea cave that permitted
them to smuggle goods and people out of and into the town under the
nose of the authorities.
When the vice-chancellor discovered one such passage behind a
wooden panel in the chancellor's office, he decided to set up a smuggling
ring of his own. The deeper catacombs are now home to his “enforcer”, a
white pudding that came into the possession of the vice-chancellor via an
adventuring party that captured it on the northern tundra while sacking the
frozen fortress of a frost giant jarl. The beast roams the catacombs at will,
and though the smugglers are aware of its existance and are forewarned
to avoid it, they still hate being in the catacombs. Recently, two students
of the university have disappeared. They came to suspect the activities
of their vice-chancellor and were locked in the catacombs to be killed by
the beast. One of the students has been so consumed, but the other has
managed to avoid the beast for three days.
The smuggling ring keeps their treasure hidden behind a false stone in
the catacombs. It currently numbers 1d4 x 1,000 gp and 3d6 pounds of
calamus (worth 8 gp per pound).

Purple Moss
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
This plant is a distant cousin of yellow mold. It feeds on moisture, so
any area in which it grows is always extremely dry. Purple moss emits a
sweet smell to a range of 10 feet that has the same effect as a sleep spell.
A victim that falls asleep is quickly covered by the moss. It takes 1 round
to cover a small creature and 2 rounds to cover a human-sized creature. A
creature so covered suffocates in 1d4 rounds. Slain victims are digested
in 1d2 hours by acidic secretions from the moss. Purple moss can be
destroyed by fire.

Credit: The Purple Moss originally appeared in the First Edition module B3
Palace of the Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used
by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jean
Wells.

Sleepiness Is Weakness of Character
In a finely crafted portion of a dungeon clad in black stone lovingly
carved by dwarven hands. The dungeon was once the home of a
flamboyant magician who wished to dwell away from other human
beings. Taking residence in the upper levels of a dungeon, his power was
enough to keep the local humanoids at bay.
Besides the requisite study (with its displacer skin rugs, preserved
albino ape heads hanging on the wall, brontotherium foot umbrella holder
and scrolls in leather cases) and the laboratory (overrun with pink giant
rats and what looks like a giant, pulsating lung that they protect with their
lives), there is a fine wine cellar. The cellar contains a number of bottles
of exotic beverages, including a bamboo pipe containing mbege, three
reddish gourds containing chicha, a crock of blaand and dozens of bottles
of sweet and spiced wine. The cellar also contains the desiccated body of
the magician, still clad in his velvet robes and floppy hat. The magician
wears a conical mask over his face filled with bitter herbs. On the walls
grows a sweet-smelling purple moss. The mask was intended to counter
the scent of the purple moss, which he grew purposely in the cellar to
keep it dry and cool. In the dry air the bitter herbs lost their effectiveness
and the magician succumbed to the moss.

Pyrolisk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Conflagration gaze, pyrotechnics, immunity to fire
Move: 6/24 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

The pyrolisk resembles a cockatrice and is often mistaken for it.
The difference lies in the coloration of its tail feathers and wings: the
pyrolisk has a single red feather in its tail and a reddish tinge to its wings.
Otherwise, it is identical to the cockatrice in appearance.
A creature within 30 feet that meets a pyrolisk's gaze bursts into
flames, taking 4d8 points of damage (saving throw for half). The flames
immediately burn out so there is no continuing damage or effect.
Once per round, a pyrolisk can use pyrotechnics as the spell. The
pyrolisk can only use the fireworks version of the spell.

Credit: The Pyrolisk originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Furnace Punishment
On the banks of a subterranean river (reachable via a grotto, the
entrance marked with a statue of the goddess of animals) a druidic
hermit has constructed a strange parliament of awakened animals. The
banks of the slow river are lined with stone couches upon which sit the
assembled beasts of the surrounding jungle. The tiger has been elected the
parliament's speaker, both for his deep, resounding voice and his threats
to consume at least half of the parliament if he was not given the position.
The beasts rule over the jungle, keeping it safe from the depredations
of humanoids. The bats serve as the parliament's spies, hanging from
the limbs of tall trees and always listening. The parliament's executioner
dwells in dry, hot cave located beneath the parliament chamber. A person
thrown into the opening will fall 20 feet to the floor of the cavern, where a
flight of 1d3+1 pyrolisks dwells. The pyrolisks have not been awakened,
but they really don’t need to be to do their job.
The cavern lair of the pyrolisks connects to other subterranean passages
and chambers, most of them volcanic vents and lava tubes that eventually
wind up in a veritable sea of magma located 3 miles beneath the surface.
The lair is littered with no fewer than thirty charred corpses, most of them
goblins, but a few humans, elves and dwarves as well. All of the bodies
were stripped of their valuables before being dropped into the “furnace”.

Quantum
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 4 quantum tentacles (2d6+3)
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Dimension door, disintegrate, +2 magic weapons
to hit, mirror image
Move: 12 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A quantum's outline flickers and changes randomly, at first appearing to
have four tentacles, then eight more appear and waver menacingly before
vanishing. Its general shape is serpentine, with an uncertain number
of tentacles dangling beneath it. The only constant is its six glowing
eyes, three on each side of what must be its head. Quantums lash
opponents with their tentacles. Three times per day, it can attack
with a single tentacle and set up a vibration in an opponent that
causes the creature's molecular structure to shake apart (similar to
a disintegrate spell, save resists). A quantum can appear to be in
two places at once (as per a mirror image spell) and can create a
dimension door each round.

Ring My Bell
The underground chamber is massive, a quarter mile from
rock wall to rock wall, with a ceiling rising 80 feet overhead.
Long tapering stalactites hang from the roof, some reaching
the ground in slender columns of stone. Several of the stone
pillars are shattered and broken. Rubble litters the cavern floor.
Splitting the room is a 200-foot-wide underground river
that steams and bubbles. The water is 15 feet deep and burns
at nearly 100 degrees. Clouds of steam rise from the stream,
making the air thick with a white sulfurous mist.

A dented iron bell sits on a small island in the center of the
river. The bell is nearly 5 feet tall, and hangs from a frame of
water-slickened wood. The bell weighs nearly 1,000 pounds.

A wooden striker sits near the bell. A small bridge of wooden
planks held together by fraying ropes crosses from the shore to
the island.

If struck, the bell sounds a loud peal that sets up a vibration on
the water that soon sets the stone columns to quaking. The vibration
attracts a quantum's attention within 1d6 rounds. The quantum
flickers into the room over the bell. The thick clouds of steam hide its
form as it drifts moves to investigate.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Quasi-Elemental, Acid (2HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d4 + 1d4 acid)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Acid, fumes
Move: 6/30 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

At rest, an acid quasi-elemental is a clear puddle of liquid with a
slightly green hue. It can rise up like a wave in a manner similar to a
water elemental, or ooze along solid surfaces by sending out tendrils and
pulling itself along. Wherever it travels, it leaves behind a shallow trough
that emits wisps of smoke. In the midst of the acid quasi-elemental one
can barely make out regions of darker green that form a vaguely human
face. Acid quasi-elementals slam opponents with an acid attack. The
bigger elementals have stronger acid attacks. Anyone within 5 feet of
an acid quasi-elemental must make a save or be overcome by the acidic
vapors rising off the creature (1d6 points of damage per round).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Acid (4HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d6 + 1d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Acid, fumes
Move: 6/30 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

At rest, an acid quasi-elemental is a clear puddle of liquid with a
slightly green hue. It can rise up like a wave in a manner similar to a
water elemental, or ooze along solid surfaces by sending out tendrils and
pulling itself along. Wherever it travels, it leaves behind a shallow trough
that emits wisps of smoke. In the midst of the acid quasi-elemental one
can barely make out regions of darker green that form a vaguely human
face. Acid quasi-elementals slam opponents with an acid attack. The
bigger elementals have stronger acid attacks. Anyone within 5 feet of
an acid quasi-elemental must make a save or be overcome by the acidic
vapors rising off the creature (1d6 points of damage per round).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Acid (6HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 slam (1d8 + 1d8 acid)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Acid, fumes
Move: 6/30 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

At rest, an acid quasi-elemental is a clear puddle of liquid with a
slightly green hue. It can rise up like a wave in a manner similar to a
water elemental, or ooze along solid surfaces by sending out tendrils and
pulling itself along. Wherever it travels, it leaves behind a shallow trough
that emits wisps of smoke. In the midst of the acid quasi-elemental one
can barely make out regions of darker green that form a vaguely human
face. Acid quasi-elementals slam opponents with an acid attack. The
bigger elementals have stronger acid attacks. Anyone within 5 feet of
an acid quasi-elemental must make a save or be overcome by the acidic
vapors rising off the creature (1d6 points of damage per round).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Acid (8HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 slams (2d4 + 2d4 acid)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Acid, fumes
Move: 6/30 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

At rest, an acid quasi-elemental is a clear puddle of liquid with a
slightly green hue. It can rise up like a wave in a manner similar to a
water elemental, or ooze along solid surfaces by sending out tendrils and
pulling itself along. Wherever it travels, it leaves behind a shallow trough
that emits wisps of smoke. In the midst of the acid quasi-elemental one
can barely make out regions of darker green that form a vaguely human
face. Acid quasi-elementals slam opponents with an acid attack. The
bigger elementals have stronger acid attacks. Anyone within 5 feet of
an acid quasi-elemental must make a save or be overcome by the acidic
vapors rising off the creature (1d6 points of damage per round).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Acid (10HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 slams (2d6 + 2d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Acid, fumes
Move: 6/30 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

At rest, an acid quasi-elemental is a clear puddle of liquid with a
slightly green hue. It can rise up like a wave in a manner similar to a
water elemental, or ooze along solid surfaces by sending out tendrils and
pulling itself along. Wherever it travels, it leaves behind a shallow trough
that emits wisps of smoke. In the midst of the acid quasi-elemental one
can barely make out regions of darker green that form a vaguely human
face. Acid quasi-elementals slam opponents with an acid attack. The
bigger elementals have stronger acid attacks. Anyone within 5 feet of
an acid quasi-elemental must make a save or be overcome by the acidic
vapors rising off the creature (1d6 points of damage per round).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Acid (12HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 2 slams (2d8 + 2d8 acid)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Acid, fumes
Move: 6/30 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

At rest, an acid quasi-elemental is a clear puddle of liquid with a
slightly green hue. It can rise up like a wave in a manner similar to a
water elemental, or ooze along solid surfaces by sending out tendrils and
pulling itself along. Wherever it travels, it leaves behind a shallow trough
that emits wisps of smoke. In the midst of the acid quasi-elemental one
can barely make out regions of darker green that form a vaguely human
face. Acid quasi-elementals slam opponents with an acid attack. The
bigger elementals have stronger acid attacks. Anyone within 5 feet of
an acid quasi-elemental must make a save or be overcome by the acidic
vapors rising off the creature (1d6 points of damage per round).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Acid Washed
This 40-foot-by-40-foot room is closed off by a set of steel doors set
tightly into the stone on opposite walls. A stone sluice runs at a 45-degree
angle down from a small glowing trapdoor in the 20-foot-high ceiling.
The stone channel ends 4 feet above the floor, where a 10-foot-by-10foot square frame of pitted metal stands. A 5-inch plate of copper is held
horizontally off the floor in an iron frame. A brass plate in the frame is
pocked and eaten through, and covered in green and brown swirls of
color. A ring of powdered diamond grit fills a circle that runs completely
around the metal frame. A partially dissolved skeleton lies on the stone
floor beneath the sluice. A small handle on a silver chain hangs down
from the underside of the ramp.

If the chain is pulled, an acid quasi-elemental pours down the ramp.
Originally, the quasi-elemental poured over the copper plate to etch it
so it could be sold as “acid-burned art.” Now, a chink in the stone ramp
allows the creature to escape and drop onto the person pulling the chain.
Ten rounds after the chain is pulled, the quasi-elemental is automatically
returned to an enchanted dimensional space in the ceiling.

Transmute Water to Acid
Spell Level: Druid 5, Magic-User 5
Range: Close (Referee's discretion)
Duration: Instantaneous
This spell transforms a volume of normal or magically created
water into an equal volume of highly corrosive acid. Any creature
touching this acid takes 1d6 damage per round of exposure.

Transmute Acid to Water
Spell Level: Druid 5, Magic-User 5
Range: Close (Referee's discretion)
Duration: Instantaneous
This spell is identical to transmute water to acid but it changes
an equal volume of corrosive acid into plain, clear (and safe)
water.
A creature constructed of acid takes 1d4 points of damage per
level of the caster (save for half).

Quasi-Elemental, Lightning (6HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class:   1 [18]
Attack: Slam (1d6 electricity)
Saving Throw:   11
Special: Electricity, globe weapon resistance (50%), immunity to electricity resistance to fire and (50%), vulnerability to water
Move: 24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 9/1100

This creature appears as a bluish globe of electrical energy. Lightning plays
off and around its body.

Credit: The Lightning Quasi-elemental originally appeared in the First Edition
module EX2 The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983)
and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/ Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Quasi-Elemental, Lightning (9HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice:     9
Armor Class:  0 [19]
Attack:       Slam (1d8 electricity)
Saving Throw: 5
Special:      Electricity, globe weapon resistance (50%), immunity to electricity resistance to fire and acid (50%), vulnerability to water
Move:         24 (flying)
Alignment:    Neutrality
CL/XP:        13/2300

This creature appears as a bluish globe of electrical energy. Lightning plays off and around its body.

Credit: The Lightning Quasi-elemental originally appeared in the First Edition
module EX2 The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983)
and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/ Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Quasi-Elemental, Lightning (12HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class:  -1 [21]
Attack:       Slam (2d6 electricity)
Saving Throw: 3
Special:      Electricity, globe weapon resistance (50%), immunity to electricity resistance to fire and acid (50%), vulnerability to water
Move:         24 (flying)
Alignment:    Neutrality
CL/XP:        16/3200

This creature appears as a bluish globe of electrical energy. Lightning plays off and around its body.

Lightning quasi-elementals are native to the Plane of Elemental Air, the
Positive Energy Plane, and a rumored elemental plane situated in between (the
Quasi-Elemental Plane of Lightning). They are sometimes summoned to the
Material Plane by magic-users, but more often than not slip through a rift
between the Material Plane and elemental plane during a lightning storm. They
appear as bluish globes of electricity, arcs of lightning playing off and
around its body.

A lightning quasi-elemental is composed entirely of electricity and deals
electricity damage each time it hits. A creature striking the lightning
quasielemental unarmed, or a creature striking the lightning quasi-elemental
with a weapon take this same electricity damage each time one of their attacks
hits. Metallic creatures or creatures using metal weapons take an extra 1d6
points of electricity damage each time one of their attacks hits.

A lightning quasi-elemental can discharge one globe of electricity per HD it
possesses once per round. Globes hover 1 foot from the quasielemental and move
with the creature. An opponent that moves within 5 feet of a globe discharges
it and takes the electricity damage shown on the table below. An affected
creature can make a saving throw to reduce the damage by half. Once a globe
discharges, it is destroyed and a lightning quasi-elemental cannot recreate it
for 4 hours.

1d6
1d8
2d6


A lightning quasi-elemental takes 1d8 points of damage per gallon of
water it contacts.

Credit: The Lightning Quasi-elemental originally appeared in the First Edition
module EX2 The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983)
and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/ Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.


Tower of Elemental Portals
The top of the tallest mountain in the neighborhood is always shrouded in
storm clouds, with terrific peals of thunder echoing through the surrounding
valleys and fast, thuggish rivers pouring into the countryside beyond where
they water some of the finest, sweetest grasses in the kingdom.
The cattlemen of the lowlands tell many tales about Thunder Mountain.
Some say it is the home of a mighty storm giant, others that the gods
have hidden a powerful magic item and posted the storm clouds as its
guardians. The truth of the matter is nearly as fantastic.

The top of the mountain in question is flat and topped by a large maze
of 20-foot tall malachite halls. In the center of the maze there is a stout,
green tower once occupied by a wizard called the “Portal Keeper”. The
Keeper died long ago without an heir or apprentice to take over his job
and in the ensuing decades the portals hidden within the maze have not
been maintained.

The Keeper's Tower in the center of the maze might offer clues as to the
nature of the maze and its remaining golems, perhaps in tapestries hanging
in the lower floor. The upper floor contains the Keeper's chamber, where
his skeletal body still lies where he died in his bed. A large chest in the
room (locked, poison needle trap) contains a smaller chest (also locked,
poisoned) that contains 1,900 gp, 2,400 pp. The skeletal remains grasp a
brass statuette of a sylph (worth 600 gp).

The portals in question lead to the four elemental planes. They are located
in the four corners of the maze and take the form of four stone golems in the
shape of giant animals. The portals are located in the bellies of the golems,
and thus require one to be swallowed to venture into the plane of question.
Of course, most adventurers misunderstand the intentions of the golems
and fight them. In the intervening decades, two of the golems - those of air
(in the shape of a coiled serpent) and fire (in the shape of a lion) have been
destroyed, throwing open their belly portals. The stone golems of earth
(shaped like a lizard) and water (shaped like a hippopotamus) are intact.
The mixture of the hot, dry air of the fire plane and the cool, moist air of
the air plane is responsible for the never-ending storm that now tops the
mountain. Because of the elemental origins of the storm, it is inhabited by
a large lightning quasi-elemental. Because of its presence, the malachite
walls of the maze are charged with static electricity, causing the hair of
adventurers who enter it to stand on end.

Quasi-Elemental, Obsidian (2HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 claw (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Death throes (1d6, 5 ft. radius), molten glass (1d4),
resists fire
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

This creature is a powerfully built, roughly humanoid-shaped monolith
of black stone. Its hands end in wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No
facial features can be discerned.

Obsidian quasi-elementals appear as powerfully built, roughly
humanoid-shaped creatures of blackened stone. Their hands end in
wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No facial features can be discerned.

Some obsidian quasi-elementals have flecks of dark green or white
markings on their form. Obsidian quasi-elementals attack with their
claws. If slain, the creature explodes in a cloud of razor-sharp bits of
obsidian. Any hit on the elemental with a piercing or slashing weapon
causes an eruption of molten glass that burns the attacker (save avoids).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Obsidian (4HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 claw (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Death throes (2d6, 10 ft. radius), molten glass (1d6),
resists fire
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

This creature is a powerfully built, roughly humanoid-shaped monolith
of black stone. Its hands end in wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No
facial features can be discerned.

Obsidian quasi-elementals appear as powerfully built, roughly
humanoid-shaped creatures of blackened stone. Their hands end in
wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No facial features can be discerned.

Some obsidian quasi-elementals have flecks of dark green or white
markings on their form. Obsidian quasi-elementals attack with their
claws. If slain, the creature explodes in a cloud of razor-sharp bits of
obsidian. Any hit on the elemental with a piercing or slashing weapon
causes an eruption of molten glass that burns the attacker (save avoids).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Obsidian (6HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 claw (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Death throes (3d6, 10 ft. radius), molten glass (1d8),
resists fire and cold
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

This creature is a powerfully built, roughly humanoid-shaped monolith
of black stone. Its hands end in wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No
facial features can be discerned.

Obsidian quasi-elementals appear as powerfully built, roughly
humanoid-shaped creatures of blackened stone. Their hands end in
wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No facial features can be discerned.

Some obsidian quasi-elementals have flecks of dark green or white
markings on their form. Obsidian quasi-elementals attack with their
claws. If slain, the creature explodes in a cloud of razor-sharp bits of
obsidian. Any hit on the elemental with a piercing or slashing weapon
causes an eruption of molten glass that burns the attacker (save avoids).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Obsidian (8HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 claws (2d4)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Death throes (4d6, 30 ft. radius), molten glass (1d8),
resists fire and cold
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

This creature is a powerfully built, roughly humanoid-shaped monolith
of black stone. Its hands end in wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No
facial features can be discerned.

Obsidian quasi-elementals appear as powerfully built, roughly
humanoid-shaped creatures of blackened stone. Their hands end in
wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No facial features can be discerned.

Some obsidian quasi-elementals have flecks of dark green or white
markings on their form. Obsidian quasi-elementals attack with their
claws. If slain, the creature explodes in a cloud of razor-sharp bits of
obsidian. Any hit on the elemental with a piercing or slashing weapon
causes an eruption of molten glass that burns the attacker (save avoids).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Obsidian (10HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 claws (2d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Death throes (5d6, 30 ft. radius),
molten glass (1d8), resists fire and cold
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

This creature is a powerfully built, roughly humanoid-shaped monolith
of black stone. Its hands end in wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No
facial features can be discerned.

Obsidian quasi-elementals appear as powerfully built, roughly
humanoid-shaped creatures of blackened stone. Their hands end in
wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No facial features can be discerned.

Some obsidian quasi-elementals have flecks of dark green or white
markings on their form. Obsidian quasi-elementals attack with their
claws. If slain, the creature explodes in a cloud of razor-sharp bits of
obsidian. Any hit on the elemental with a piercing or slashing weapon
causes an eruption of molten glass that burns the attacker (save avoids).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Quasi-Elemental, Obsidian (12HD)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 2 claws (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Death throes (6d6, 30 ft. radius),
molten glass eruption (1d8), resists fire and cold
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

This creature is a powerfully built, roughly humanoid-shaped monolith
of black stone. Its hands end in wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No
facial features can be discerned.

Obsidian quasi-elementals appear as powerfully built, roughly
humanoid-shaped creatures of blackened stone. Their hands end in
wicked, serrated and jagged claws. No facial features can be discerned.

Some obsidian quasi-elementals have flecks of dark green or white
markings on their form. Obsidian quasi-elementals attack with their
claws. If slain, the creature explodes in a cloud of razor-sharp bits of
obsidian. Any hit on the elemental with a piercing or slashing weapon
causes an eruption of molten glass that burns the attacker (save avoids).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

A World of Hurt
Columns of jagged obsidian rise along the horizon, sharp pillars
punching through the forest. Trees lie in splintered pieces, and boulders
are split in half by the serrated towers rising 20 feet into the air. Towering
buttes of blackened rock sparkle like dark glass in the middle of this
encroaching forest. The obsidian is sharp and slices anyone moving
through it for 1d6 points of damage.

The village of Keer-Toth is cut in half by shards of glass. Bodies lie in
pieces amid the densely packed columns, and blood runs around the base
of the shafts. The remaining villagers are fleeing the columns overrunning
their homes. It appears the columns rose in the middle of the night to
skewer half the stone houses.

A magic-user named Yurt McCallot is to blame. The lonely wizard tried
to open a portal to a plane of lovelorn women – but instead unleashed
an expanding rift to the Quasi-Plane of Obsidian. The tear is slowly
switching the two planes, taking villages from this world into the barren
bleakness of the Obsidian Plane. So far, 10 obsidian quasi-elementals are
wandering free, with more arriving each day. The only way to stop the
spread of the Obsidian Plane is to find McCallot's body in the middle
of the forest and smash a small obsidian locket he holds. His body is
currently held 10 feet off the ground, impaled on a serrated spike tree.

Quickling
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2d6
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  Dagger (1d3)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Poison, spells, blur, natural invisibility
Move: 48
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Quicklings resemble small elves with large ears that rise to points
above their heads. Their skin is pale blue to blue-white and hair is either
silver or white. They prefer clothes of bright and boisterous colors; reds,
yellows, silvers, blacks, and blues are among their favorites. Quicklings
never wear armor. They speak the common tongue and the language of
pixies and brownies. Both are spoken so quickly that even those able to
speak one of the languages may still find it difficult to converse with a
quickling.

Because of their rapid metabolism, quicklings reach adulthood by the
age of 2, middle age at 5, old age at 12, and venerable at age 15.
Quicklings employ daggers lined with poison extracted from kava
plants. This poison induces sleep in its victims. When a quickling coats a
weapon with this poison, the poison lasts for 1 turn or until it is touched
or scores a successful hit.

A quickling that moves in a round appears as a blur. This gives all
attacks against the quickling a 20% chance to miss their attack (roll the
miss chance before an attack roll is made).

A quickling is effectively invisible (as the spell) when standing
motionless. It loses this invisibility and remains visible (though blurred)
in any round in which it moves.

Quicklings can cast the following spells, each once per day: Dancing
lights, flare, levitate, shatter and ventriloquism.

Credit: The Quickling originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Slicker Than Snot
You come across a forest clearing occupied by a highly agitated brown
bear. The beast has been wounded, its flesh rended and torn and there are
several trickles of blood matting its fur. It is circling in the center of the
clearing, swaying its massive head back and forth as though looking for
something. The bear is actually a werebear, and it has a mere 10 hp
between it and death.

The werebear's assailants are a gang of 1d3+1 quicklings. The
quicklings are currently standing still and are thus naturally invisible. As
much fun as they’ve had tormenting the werebear, they will not pass up
the chance to kill adventurers (better treasure, you know).
If the adventurers and werebear come out of the encounter alive, the
wearbear will gladly lead them back (or give directions if it must be
carried) to its lodge. The werebear's lodge is a cabin built against a cave,
thus making half of the lair subterranean. The lodge has a large fire pit
and woven mats of fragrant grasses for sitting/sleeping. The subterranan
portion of the lodge contains casks of mead, pots of honey, jars of berry
preserves, two venison and a wild pig hanging from hooks in the ceiling
and other foodstuffs.

The wearbear will take two or three weeks to completely heal from
its wounds, and will invite his rescuers to spend that time enjoying his
hospitality. If they consent, they will meet the other werebears of the
district and might learn a great deal about the surrounding woodlands.

Believed to be the offspring of an elf and a brownie (see that entry),
the quickling is a chaotic faerie creature that hates all other races,
especially the other fey races. How they came to be evil and malign is
still a mystery, but legend speaks of the first quicklings as being great
sorcerers. Elven scholars believe these quickling sorcerers unleashed
some extradimensional force that was never meant for mortal creatures.

Quickwood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7 (or more)
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Root (entangle) or bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Fear aura, grasping roots, immunity to electricity, immunity to fire (see below), remote sensing, surprise on roll of 1-4 on 1d6
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Quickwoods appear as nothing more than common oak trees and are
indistinguishable from them at distances greater than 30 feet. Closer
inspection (at a distance of 10 feet or less) reveals a human-like visage
embedded in the trunk. They are carnivores and prefer the taste of human
or elven flesh above all others.

A quickwood's body is brown and textured like bark, and many strong,
rigid branches protrude from its trunk. Each branch has many smaller
branches that sport leaves of a deep, rich green color. Quickwoods usually
root themselves to a particular location and rarely move. When they
do move, they pull themselves slowly along with their roots. A typical
quickwood stands 16 feet tall.

Quickwoods speak the language of the nymphs and satyrs, and might
speak the common tongue of men if it makes enough meals of them.
A typical quickwood (7 HD) has 7 roots it uses to grab foes. For every
2 HD above 7, a quickwood has one additional root it can use in combat
(thus, a 9 HD quickwood has 8 roots and a 15 HD quickwood has 11
roots).

A quickwood can use a normal oak tree within 360 feet as a magical
sensor to view its surroundings. This ability is similar to a clairaudience/
clairvoyance spell and allows a quickwood to see (including with
darkvision) and hear through a sensor. A quickwood does not need line
of sight to establish a sensor. A quickwood can establish a new magical
sensor in another tree within range within seconds, though it can never
have more sensors at one time than its Hit Dice. A quickwood with
multiple sensors can switch between them freely.

An oak tree utilized as a magical sensor takes on a human-like visage
(similar to a quickwood). Ad adventurer has a 1 in 6 (2 in 6 for elves and
halflings) of noticing the tree's visage.

If a quickwood is targeted by a spell (excluding area spells) and it makes
its saving throw against the spell's effects, it takes no damage and absorbs
some of the spell's energy and releases it as a fear effect in a 10-foot
radius per level of the spell. Affected creatures must succeed on a saving
throw or be affected as by a fear spell.

If a quickwood hits with a root attack, it entangles its victim unless the
victim passes a saving throw. If it entangles a victim, it drags the foe 30
feet closer each subsequent round. A quickwood can draw in a creature
within 3 feet of itself and bite with a +2 bonus in the same round. A
root has 10 hp. If the root is currently entangling a target, the root
suffers a 2 point penalty to its Armor Class. Severing a root deals no
damage to a quickwood.

A quickwood can perspire, granting it immunity to fire for one hour.
Afterwards, it must wait one turn before using this ability again.

Rotten Wood
After a long journey in search of the secret druid's grove of the old
forest, the adventurers will take great comfort in seeing a stone marker
decorated by chalk and ochre drawings of hunters and deer. The marker
is one of several dozen that form a circular boundary of the holy druidic
precinct. Beyond this point, chaotics and lawfuls must not journey unless
they are willing to have a curse (a cumulative -1 penalty to saving throws
with each lawful or chaotic act they commit until the moon has passed
through its phases) - or at least, they would be cursed if the grove was
still sanctified.

Stepping into the holy precinct, they will find its outer portions thick
with large oak trees covered in moss. The air is thick and seems to be
charged with power and one will hear no animal noises - not even the
buzzing of insects - in the area. Knowing they are entering a druidic holy
place, the adventurers might not be alarmed by the presence of grave,
staring faces on some of the oaks.

The staring oaks serve the new master of the grove, a massive (15 HD)
quickwood. The quickwood dwells at the center of the grove, dipping its
branches and roots in a fountain of longevity (per potion of longevity,
only one dip per person). The quickwood destroyed the local druids (who
happened to be neanderthals) and its chaotic presence has made the grove
unholy. A druid that destroys the quickwood and re-sanctifies the grove
should be awarded with 2,000 XP. Other neutrals that participate should
be awarded 500 XP.

Credit: The Quickwood originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Raggoth
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 4 claws (1d6+2) and 1 bite (1d8+2)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Grab, pounce, rake, tormenting howl,
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

A raggoth is a sleek black-furred creature with a gaping mouth full of
sharpened fangs. Its head is wolf-like, and the creature has six muscular
legs. Its body is about 8 feet long long and ends in a thick furred tail.
A raggoth attacks with its claws and bite. If it hits one opponent with
two claw attacks, it can rake the victim for an additional 2d6+4 points
of damage with its middle claws. Once every 1d4 rounds, a raggoth can
let loose a piercing howl that demoralizes any creature within 60 feet.
Creatures hearing the howl that fail a save suffer a -2 penalty on attacks
and saves.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Cats and Dogs
A cat's deep-throated growl sounds from the Kajaani Forest. The noise
is punctuated by a cat's loud hiss. A horde of 8 scratched and bloodied
tangtals rushes out of the woods and cowers behind the PCs. Only one of
the giant cats is real; the rest are merely mirror images of the frightened
and exhausted original. Just after the cat bursts out of the forest, its
pursuers arrive: 3 mangy raggoths. The dogs paw the ground with their
six legs and bare rows of sharp teeth. A guttural growl starts in its chest
and vibrates along the slick fur of its throat. The raggoth is intent on
catching the cat and ignores PCs unless they get in its way. If PCs help
the battered cat, they may make a new friend who’ll tag along with them
as long as they feed it.

Rakklethorn Toad
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: Thorn volley (1d6 + poison), bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Poison, thorns
Move: 4
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A rakklethorn toad is a small 3-foot-long toad with dozens of small
needle-like thorns protruding from its back. Its skin is mottled brown
and green and glistens with a dull sheen, while its eyes are gray and its
underbelly is pale white. The thorns are brownish-black. A rakklethorn
toad attacks by arching its back and firing a volley of thorns up to 50 feet
at an opponent. The thorns are coated with a debilitating poison that does
1d3 points of damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Mating Game
The Sin Mire Swamp is alive with sounds and movement, birds flapping
out of the moss-covered trees, fish splashing in the three-feet-deep
water. Cattails sway in bunches, and marsh grasses buzz with swarming
mosquitoes. The murky swamp is thick with viscous jelly-like balls that
cling to anything dipped into the water.
Three colonies of rakkletorn toads – a total of 30 toads – have come
together for their annual mating frenzy. The water is thick with the jellylike eggs released by the females, and the males are hyper-aggressive
toward anyone entering the area.

Rat, Barrow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d4 hp
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3), 1 bite (1d2)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Toughen hide
Move: 12/6/6 (climb/burrow)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: A/5

Barrow rats are 15-inch-long brownish-gray rats with long gray or
brown, hairless tails. Their underbellies are lighter in color than their fur
often appearing white in some rare species, but usually appearing light
brown or slate. Some barrow rats have a dark brown or black stripe on
their dorsal side that runs the length of their body. Once per day, a barrow
rat can toughen its hide to be as tough as stone (AC 3 [16]).

Trapped Like . . . You Know
The 10-foot-wide corridor continues in a straight line for 50 feet before
turning to the right at a 90-degree bend. The walls are heavy rust-colored
stones set flush atop one another. Copper lanterns hang every 15 feet,
each casting a feeble greenish light down the hall. The center 15 feet of
the corridor is a pit trap that drops into a 20-foot-deep hole beneath the
passageway. The walls of the pit are pocked by hundreds of small holes.
Rat droppings fill the floor of the hole.
The pit is home to a warren of barrow rats that swarm out to attack
anyone falling into the hole. The aggressive rats consider the pit their
territory and defend it against invaders.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Rat, Brain
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (1d2)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Psionic abilities, surprise on roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 9/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Brain rats resemble their normal cousins and are indistinguishable from
normal rats. Brain rats (also called psionic rats) are intelligent relatives
of normal rats. Brain rats cluster in large groups and wait for prey to pass
by. Brain rats flee if combat goes against them. Brain rats can use ESP (as
the spell) at will. Three times per day they can unleash a mind thrust that
deals 1d6 points of damage per point of intelligence difference between
the rat (has a 14 intelligence) and its victim. Brain rats can also use the
spells confusion and feeblemind once per day.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Secret of Yimm
The weird house on the hill (built in the Jacobethan style of bluish
bricks), the locals will tell visitors, belongs to the reclusive wizard Yimm.
Though rarely seen, the wizard's presence was often felt by the locals,
whether from the mysterious gifts that would appear on doorsteps when
people were in need or from the stream of adventurers into the town to
visit the wizard and beg for favors.

The interior of Yimm's home wasn’t terribly strange - a foyer, study,
sitting room, dining room (rarely used), kitchen, rooms upstairs and
a lead-lined laboratory in the cellar. The rooms are packed with the
mementos of a well-traveled wizard, most of them being interesting but
not terribly valuable (after all, a wizard's experiments eat up most of their
wealth).

Two rooms of the house are worthy of mention. The kitchen was no
longer used for its intended purpose for two reasons. Firstly, Yimm
practiced a strict dietary regemin, eating nothing but pottage and drinking
nothing but claret. A cauldron of pottage was kept always over the fire
in the study, while the casks of claret were kept in the downstairs broom
closet. The kitchen, made of stone and containing a large fireplace, was
now the home of a fire drake called Rix. Each morning after waking,
Yimm would make his way into Rix's chamber, set some animated tools
to cleaning up after the creature and teleport himself and his pet into the
far mountains so that he could take his morning constitutional and the
fire drake could romp and hunt. That being accomplished, Yimm and Rix
would return home, Rix to take a nap next to the fireplace and Yimm
to eat a bowl of pottage, drink a flute of claret and then head into his
laboratory.

The laboratory is the other interesting room in the house, for it now holds
the gibbering remains of Yimm, his mind completely broken. The night
before, he discovered in the worst way possible that the two laboratory
rats that escaped many months ago had been quite active, populating the
walls of the wizard's house with 1d6+5 brain rats.

Entry into the house is not difficult, for the wizard never locks his front
door. Rix will be found to be quite restless, missing his master and his
customary romp in the mountains. The brain rats will be in the walls,
watching all and preparing an ambush for the visitors.

The wizard keeps a treasure of 1d6 x 100 gp and a coral sculpture of a
dolphin worth 450 gp hidden in an extradimensional place that one enters
by staring for 3 solid minutes into the eyes of a painting of a hideous
duchess hung on the wall.

Rat, Ethereal
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  Bite (1d3 plus ethereal poisoning)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Ethereal poisoning, etherealness, surprise on roll of
1-4 on 1d6
Move: 9/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Ethereal rats, like normal rats, they can be found just about anywhere.
They look like grayish-black rats about 2 feet long. Ethereal rats attack
by biting a foe and then jumping to the Ethereal Plane. If badly wounded
in battle an ethereal rat uses its ethereal jaunt ability to escape to the
Ethereal Plane.
The bite of an ethereal rat deals 1d4 points of strength damage to a
victim. At strength 0, the victim becomes ethereal (as if affected by the
etherealness spell). The victim remains in this state until at least half of
the victim's normal strength score is recovered. Strength returns at the
rate of 1 point per day.
An ethereal rat can shift from the Ethereal to the Material Plane per oil
of etherealness.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Into the Ether
The village of Thorper has been overrun by a pack of 1d6+5 ethereal
rats, called into the Material Plane by a soothesayer attempting to manifest
the spirit of the recently departed (and beloved) duchess of Thorper by
her husband. The rats have made their way through the village, attacking
people seemingly at random and sending them into an ethereal state. The
arrival of so many people into the borderlands between the deep Ethereal
and the Material Plane has created something of a feeding frenzy for the
natural predators of the Ethereal Plane, their loved one's having to watch
helplessly while many were savaged by seemingly invisible horrors, their
dead, ethereal bodies dragged away into the deep Ethereal to be devoured.
The living ethereals have banded together, gathering in the space
roughly analagous to the duke's great hall to wait for their strength to
slowly return and send them back into the Material Plane. They would be
very thankful (to the tune of 1,000 gp) for a party of seasoned adventurers
to trap and destroy the ethereal rats.

Rat, Shadow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d4 plus 1d3 strength)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Disease, strength damage, incorporeal, shadow
blend, surprise on a roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 15/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Shadow rats are essentially undead rats that can assume an incorporeal
form. Other than their semi-translucent form (which they maintain
regardless of their incorporeality or not), they resemble their earthly
counterparts in all respects save for their rotting flesh, torn and matted
fur and blazing, red eyes. They are relentless when they attack. The
bite of the shadow rat drains one level unless the victim passes a saving
throw. Levels drained by a shadow rat return at the rate of 1 per day on a
successful saving throw.

A shadow rat can assume an incorporeal form for up to 1 hour per day.
In this form the shadow rat can only be hit by magic weapons and spells.
In any condition of illumination other than full daylight, a shadow rat
can disappear into the shadows, giving it total concealment. Artificial
illumination, even a light or continual flame spell, does not negate this
ability.

Copyright Notice: Authors Clark Peterson and Scott Greene.

Infinite Shadows
When adventurers enter this circuitous tunnel, a wall will quietly slide
in place behind them after they walk about 20 paces. Once shut, only
dwarves have a hope of finding the wall again (1 in 6 chance if not
looking, 2 in 6 chance if actively looking), but they will find it impossible
to shift (although it could conceivably be battered down with several
hours of hard labor).

The tunnel takes the shape of a rough figure “eight”. The walls of the tunnel
are rough and black and seem to absorb the light of torches. Every few feet,
these black walls are interrupted by a round plaque of goldenbrown stone. Each
of these stones measure about 3 feet in diameter and is carved to resemble
a gorgon. These stones are used to seal tombs. Behind each seal is a small
space carved into the stone wall - about 2-1/2 feet in diameter and six feet
long wherein a skeletal body wrapped in brilliantly patterned silks is
interred.

None of these bodies are undead, but they have been feasted on by
undead shadow rats. As travelers move through the hallway, there is a
2 in 6 chance per turn that they are attacked by a pack of 1d6+1 shadow
rats. The rats always come from behind one of the seals, using their
incorporeality to phase through the material. They are clever enough to
attack light bearers first.

At the intersection of the figure “eight”, there is a slim pillar that
extends from floor to ceiling. On this pillar are carved four thin faces,
each looking in a different direction. When one stands before this pillar,
the faces spring to life and proclaim themselves the Keepers of the Royal
Tombs. They inform the adventurers that should they wish to pass from
the tombs, they must first pay a toll of 30 dead shadow rats. Should this
toll be brought before the pillar, it sinks into the ground, revealing a hole
in the ceiling through which one can clamber (with the help of a boost)
into an upper level of the dungeon. One turn after this exit is revealed, the
sliding wall through which the adventurers originally entered the royal
tombs resets itself in the open position.

The small tomb spaces contain about 1d4 x 1,000 gp worth of treasure
and a pack of 1d6+6 shadow rats.

Rat, Spore
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d2 + spores)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: poison, spore cloud
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Spore rats are dog-sized rats with matted brownish fur and ruby red
eyes. Its mouth is lined with sharpened teeth and its claws appear to be
razor-sharp. A spore rat is typically up to 3 feet long and weighs about 30
pounds. Its fur is greenish-brown and is not actually fur at all, but tightly
packed funguses and mushrooms. Its eyes are ruby red or pale yellow.
Its claws and teeth are always filthy and are brownish-white in color.
The bite of a spore rat injects spores that cause nausea for 1 round unless
a save is made. Twice a day, a spore rat can release a cloud of spores in
a 5-foot cloud that causes 1d4 points of damage to any creatures in the
cloud.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

You Dirty Rat
A 12-foot skiff floats toward the PCs, hovering three feet off the
ground at all times. The boat is filled with mounds of mud and loose tree
branches. Thorny vines drape over the edges of the floating vessel and
drag along the ground. Miniature trees grow out of the dirt, and flowers
and mushrooms grow across the bow. A skeleton stands in the stern of the
skiff, using a 10-foot-long pole to push the hovering boat forward. The
boat moves at walking speed. The words Bone Barge are engraved along
its prow.

The boat is home to an infestation of 1d10+8 spore rats that burrow into
the muck. The mud clings to their fungus hides, making them appear to
be just large rats. The spore rats swarm over the sides of the vessel to bite
anyone attacking their floating home. They climb the dragging vines to
return to the lair once the threat is dealt with.

The floating skiff belonged to Daznashal the Vicious, who lost the
boat during a storm when it burrowed into the Sin Mire and filled with
swampy sludge.

Rawbones
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 slams (1d8) or entrail lash (1d4)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Nauseating aura, strangulation, vomit gore, +1
magic weapons to hit, immune to cold
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A rawbones appears to be a freshly skinned and cleaned corpse standing
6 to 6-1/2 feet tall and weighing roughly 140 pounds. Its bones are
stained red with fresh blood which seems to continually weep from the
creature's body. Bits of flesh and muscle fall away from it as it moves
about and its entrails often drag the ground behind it or are wrapped
around the creature's forearms. Rawbones reek of death in a 20-foot
radius, requiring all creatures approaching them to save or become
nauseated. If a rawbones hits an opponent with an entrail lash,
the victim must save or become entangled and strangled for
1d4 points of damage each round thereafter until freed. Three
times per day, a rawbones can spit a blast of blood and gore
in a 20-foot cone that does 6d6 points of damage (save for
half).

Collateral Damage
The ruins of Castle Caern are silent and foreboding, the
collapsed ebon walls nothing more than jagged heaps of
shifting stone in the desolate landscape above the town of
Drulk. Markers stolen from the nearby graveyard to decorate the castle's
outer walls poke through the rubble, each bearing the names of the dead.
The gravestones still burn with an inner warmth.
Standing in the middle of the collapsed castle is a 20-foot-tall metal
spike radiating cool silver light. The spike looks like it was cast down
from the heavens to strike the center of the castle and punched all the way
through to its stone foundation. Symbols of the god of justice are branded
into the sliver. The silver needle is clawed and slashed, and dark blots are
burned across its surface.
Three innocents held in shackles in the dungeon didn’t survive the
explosion that leveled the castle. They died underground, choking on the
rock debris filling the tunnels around them. The three are now rawbones
who clawed their way through the rocks. They slashed at the silver lance
to exact their revenge, but went unsatisfied. They lie in wait among the
rocks for anyone approaching the silver weapon of the gods.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Red Jester
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: +2 heavy mace of merriment (1d6+1) or jester's
deck
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear cackle, jester's deck, merriment
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2,600

A red jester is a rotting humanoid wearing brightly colored clothes, floppy
shoes, and a bright red jester's hat complete with jingling bells sewn to the
ends. The creature has a permanent smirk or smile on its face, even during
combat. Some red jesters, to disguise their undead nature, don masks or wear
makeup. A red jester can unleash a fear-inducing cackle that causes fear (as
per the spell) in all creatures that fail a save.

A red jester uses a +2 heavy mace of merriment that causes any creature struck
to save or fall to the ground laughing for 1d3 rounds. The jester also can
draw a card from a deck of many things it carries and throw it at an opponent.
If the opponent is struck by the thrown card, the card's effect takes place as
if the person had drawn the card himself. The jester can draw and throw a card
once per round, and can choose which card is drawn, even drawing the same card
multiple times.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Dead Man's Hand
Fifty years ago, King Jepson IV demanded a joke, one so funny it would
leave him laughing for days. But when his court jester couldn’t deliver the
perfect punchline, the king had him executed and his body tossed in the
rubbish pile as a warning to future funnymen. But the jester took his job
seriously and rose from the dead a night later. His corpse staggered from
the kingdom, asking everyone he met for a joke that would allow him to
return and please his king. He's still looking. The red jester now wanders
into towns and asks everyone he meets for a joke, any joke. If one is
offered to the undead creature, it weighs the riddle's merits and offers a
reward – or punishment – for the effort. The jester purposefully picks a
card from his deck of many things as a sign of thanks – or a way to get
even for someone belittling his quest. Game Referees may ask players for
their best joke; those who participate and try to come up with something
funny may be rewarded. Those who dismiss the whole thing as childish –
or worse, insult the jester – won’t like the consequences.

Redcap
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d4 hp
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d4 + poison) or claws (1d2)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Poison, spell-like abilities
Move: 4
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

Redcaps stand just about 20 inches tall with wrinkled gray skin, gray
or white hair, and gray or blue eyes. Their mouths sport small upward
curving fangs, and their hands end in eagle-like talons. Redcaps prefer to
dress in greens, browns, or other drab colors, except their hats. Their hats
are always red, having been soaked in the blood of those they have slain.
They coat their weapons with a toxic poison. Redcaps can turn invisible
at will, cast dancing lights, detect good and mirror image once per day.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Hate Mill
An abandoned mill sits along a dry riverbed. A giant waterwheel is still,
the boards broken and dry. Birds make nests in the water troughs. The
three-story mill is built of gray bricks and sits dark and silent. Weeds and
flowering plants grow through the wood-slat floor. Piles of rotting grain
lies in heaps on the mill floor.
Hanging from the dusty rafters inside the mill are the bodies of nixies,
grigs, squirrels, mice, owls and moles. Each body hangs from taut nooses,
the bodies black and blue and beaten. Many are dried and rotted. The odor
of decay fills the large room. Scattered on the wood floor are hundreds of
insect bodies, some sliced in half. Limbs, thoraxes and wings lie in heaps.
A group of redcaps lives in an overturned grain bin inside the mill, while
their pet and protector – a giant chameleon – lives in a 12-foot-tall pile of
moldy corn. The redcaps collect insects at night for the chameleon. They
kill any other small animals or fey they encounter and hang their bodies
from the mill's rafters. The mill is built on an ancient redcap village, and
the redcaps fight to protect their land.

Reigon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6) and 1 bite (1d8) or weapon (1d6)
and 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Camouflage, spell-like abilities
Move: 6/6 (climb)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A reigon is a gorilla with thick, brownish-black fur. Its face is white
and its eyes are brown. Its mouth is lined with rows of sharp teeth with
the canines being slightly longer than the rest. Its hands end in wickedly
sharp black nails. Reigons stand about 8 feet tall and weigh around 600
pounds. Reigons are masters of blending into their surroundings. They
can release a concussive force blast once per day that deals 2d8 points of
damage to an opponent (save for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Ape God
Lush trees and thick vegetation form a natural dome 50 feet overhead.
Only the midday light manages to break through the green ceiling. A
flagstone terrace sits under the dome. A 15-foot-tall pillar carved with
ancient runes erupts from the patio's center. A one-foot-tall diamondshaped purple amethyst defies gravity as it spins atop the pillar. Daylight
shining through the amethyst sends flashing violet rays to the ground
around the pillar. The amethyst is a relic from a forgotten religion. Under
certain conditions and prayers, the amethyst grants ordinary animals the
gift of sentience and some minor magical powers. The runes on the pillar
describe these details, if deciphered.
Currently a troop of reigons adopts the area as a shrine to an obscure
deity. The reigons live in nearby cliffs. The reigons learned the secrets
of the amethyst's power and brought chimpanzees and orangutans to the
crystal to gain sentience. They use the lesser apes as servants. Many have
greater intelligence and compassion than the reigons, but are too weak to
fight against the more-powerful apes.

Reliquary Guardian
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 60 hp
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: +1 long sword (3d6) or slam (3d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: +2 or greater weapons to hit, immune to most
spells, pronouncement, magical powers
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3,200

A reliquary guardian is a 12-foot-tall exquisitely carved statue weighing
5,000 pounds. Reliquary guardians are constructs found guarding the
bones of saints or protecting religious icons and relics against would- be
thieves or plunderers. They stand unmoving unless activated by intrusion
into their protected sanctuary by unbelievers. Once per day, a reliquary
guardian can make a pronouncement that affects all creatures within 60
feet that hear it as if by a fear spell. Once per day, reliquary guardians
can also cast detect magic, detect invisibility, dispel magic, confusion and
feeblemind.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Bones of the Martyr
A ruined cemetery of unknown age lies in shambles amid the violently
turned ground. Stone sarcophagi, obelisks and monuments lean at random
angles across the tortured landscape. The land still shivers with temblors
that cause monuments to topple and ancient caskets to rise out of the soil.
A reliquary golem stands amid the chaos, guarding an iron urn.
The urn contains the bones and ashes of Invadak, the Sage of the
Ancients. It is rumored that worthy petitioners can request answers
from Invadak's remains. The remains swirl up from within the
urn to form a dusty apparition of Invadak. The golem smites those
unworthy to seek an audience or at the request of Invadak's shade.

Renzer (Devilfin)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6+1), 1 bite (1d8+1)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Spell-like abilities
Move: 24 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

The renzer is a large predatory creature about 12 feet long that resembles
a grayish-white shark with the head of a humanoid. The human head is hairless,
having neither hair nor eyelashes or even eyebrows. Its teeth are long and
pointed and the renzer's tongue is forked and brown in color. Its shark-like
pectoral fins end in three-fingered claws and it has two dorsal fins,
side-by-side. Its tail fins are sharply curved and are a bit lighter in color
than the rest of its body.  Twice per day, a renzer can cast cone of cold and
charm monster (fish only).

Net Loss
A hemp net spreads on the water among the ships anchored in Rout's
Harbor. A sailor floats face down in the center of the net, his arms splayed
wide and his hands wrapped tightly in the strands. The sailor's face is
bitten away, leaving a gaping hole into the man's skull.
The 20-foot-wide net is enchanted to wrap itself around anyone who
comes within 5 feet of it and fails a saving throw. The net sinks like a
stone when it entwines a victim, taking the PC into the depths. Lurking on
the bottom of the harbor are 6 sahuagins and their leader, a renzer named
Raxoc who dreams of conquering the port city.
Sahuagin: HD 2+1; AC 5[14]; Atk 1 weapon (1d8); Move 12
(Swim 18); Save 16; CL/XP 2/30; Special: None.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Retch Hound
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3+2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Breath weapon, stench
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Retch hounds are large, muscular dogs with sickly brownish-yellow fur,
matted or torn in places. Small sores cover its body, each oozing a thick,
yellowish-green liquid. Its mouth is filled with long pointed yellow teeth,
some broken off on the ends. A retch hound has four large yellow eyes
evenly aligned across its canine head. A typical retch hound stands 4 to
4 1/2 feet tall at the shoulder and weighs about 150 pounds. A sickening
stench surrounds a retch hound, nauseating opponents who approach
within 30 feet unless they make a save. Once per round, a retch hound
can belch forth a blast of digestive acid in a 10-foot cone (2d6 damage,
save for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Walking the Dogs
Corpuzon the Putrescent is a haughty lich who enjoyed a hedonistic
life when he was alive. A beefy man, Corpuzon lost much of his fat in
death, and his skin sags in loose flappy layers off his five-foot frame. His
eyes are gone, leaving ragged holes that burn with an inner green fire. A
three-pronged platinum crown (worth 600 gp) sits on his desiccated skull
with the words “Feast of Life” engraved into its surface. He wears dirty
green-and-yellow robes, and the stench of death wafts off his body in
nauseating waves.
Corpuzon always travels with his companions, Feast and Famine, two
retch hounds he fawns incessantly over. The sickening smell of the retch
hounds doesn’t affect the lich, and he's powerful enough to stop them
when the aggressive animals occasionally turn on him. Each wears a
diamond-studded collar (1,000 gp each) around its neck, to which
Corpuzon attaches a 10-foot-long leather leash.
The lich recently decided to treat the hounds to a “night on the town”
for their birthday, and strides into the nearest city with Feast and Famine
leading the way. The hounds strain at their leashes, waiting to pounce on
anyone they encounter. Corpuzon lets the dogs have their fun, but defends
himself if necessary. The 12-HD lich uses his spells to protect his pets if
they get into trouble.

Riptide Horror
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 6 tentacles (1d4 + poison) and 6 bites (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Grab, poison, half damage piercing and slashing
weapons
Move: Chaos
Alignment: 6/15/9 (swim/climb)
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Riptide horrors are grayish-tan tubeworms about 7 feet in length
with six eyeless heads. Each mouth is lined with inward curving,
serrated teeth. The underside of the riptide horror is white and
six long grayish-tan tentacles protrude from the middle of its
body. If a riptide horror hits with two tentacles on the same
opponent, it grabs the victim and pulls it to its mouths for
automatic bite damage.

Belly of the Whale
A dead whale lies on the sandy strip of shore near
the wharfs of Squall Harbor, the giant creature
bloating in the midday sun. Its skin is rubbery
and soft, and the smell of dead fish wafts off the
carcass. The sea creature's eyes are rolled up and
its mouth hangs open. Seaweed hangs in verdant
strands inside the gaping maw. The whale's
tongue lolls from the side of its mouth, and is
coated with a sticky, greenish-tan mass of eggs.
A bony chittering sound rises out of the mouth.
Two riptide horrors found the dying whale
shortly after it beached itself, and crawled into its
open mouth to mate. The creatures move freely
inside the whale's body as they await high tide to
slip out and back into the sea. They lash out with
their tentacles to pull PCs into the whale's mouth.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Rock Reptile
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Surprise on roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A rock reptile is a 5-foot long chameleon-like lizard that lairs in rocky
areas such as caves and outcroppings. It is fond of darkness and only
leaves its seclusion when it is ravaged by hunger. Its chameleon-like
ability allows it to blend with its surroundings where it is often mistaken
for a pile of rocks.
Rock reptiles are ambush hunters and lie quietly in wait for prey to
come within range. Once prey is within range, the creature springs from
its hiding place with blinding speed and bites at its prey. On the first round
after it emerges, it gains a +2 bonus on its attack roll.

Three Hermits
Beyond the green and pleasant mountains there is a vast expanse of
badlands. The badlands are composed of acre after acre of ochre-colored
stones, rounded and haphazardly stacked, some appearing as though
they could topple at any moment. There is only minor vegetation in the
badlands - some scrub, a few cacti and stiff grasses fit only for the iron
stomaches of goats.
The dominant predator in the badlands is the rock reptile. The creatures’
rocky hides blend perfectly with the landscape, making travelers easy
prey. Encounters with rock reptiles occur on a roll of 1 on 1d6 made each
hour one travels through the badlands.
It is in this wilderness that the three holy hermits of Azucar chose to
make their homes. The hermits dwell in small, shallow caves at the foot
of stone pinnacles. The least of the hermits has the power to cure all
diseases, while the greatest can return the dead to life.
Seekers of the hermits have a 1 in 6 chance per day of coming upon one.
The hermits are called Azka, Eris and Ullo. Azka can cure all diseases,
but cannot speak the truth. Eris can restore lost levels, but is cursed to do
the opposite of what is requested of her. Ullo can bring the dead back to
life, but is blind, deaf and mute, making communication with him very
difficult. When found, a hermit will be sitting in the lotus position in front
of a fire fed by creosote bushes. The hermits have the stats of normal
humans and they possess no treasure.

Credit: The Rock Reptile originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Ronus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d6+2)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 24
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A ronus is a brownish-gray wolf with the head of a falcon. Its falconhead is covered with light brown or tan-colored feathers that slowly fade
in color near the neck and blend with the fur on its canine torso. Its eyes
are a rich brown color and its beak, razor-sharp, is dark grayish-black.
The neck is lighter, almost white, and slowly blends with the lighter
brownish-gray fur on the ronus's chest.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Death Race
This encounter takes place as PCs are camping in the forest. At some
point during the night, the sound of twigs snapping is heard as something
moves toward the campfire. Four ronus step out of the trees. Each wears a
black leather collar around its neck with a gem hanging on a silver chain.
Each animal has a different color gem hanging below its beak. The gems
glow with a soft inner radiance.
The ronus are owned by a cruel magic-user named Holis Wastburn. The
gems are enchanted to permanently give off a fear effect (as per the spell
of the same name) in creatures within 20 feet. The gems cease to function
if removed from the collars. The gems are worth 150 gp if sold as a set.
The ronus immediately chase any PC who runs in fear from them. If
PCs don’t run, the ronus flee back into the trees.

Roper, Stone
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  Strand (drag) or bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Drag, freeze, stony hide, strands, venom, resistance
to normal arrows and bolts (50%), surprise on 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Stone ropers are distant relatives of the common roper though the two
species do not associate with one another. Stone ropers are always found
underground and never venture forth to the surface world. They have a
dislike for sunlight, though it doesn’t harm them in any way.
Stone ropers are primarily predators, dining on a diet of fresh meat
taken from whatever they can find and kill. When food is scarce, stone
ropers become scavengers and dine on carrion.
Stone ropers are mottled gray and brown like stone and have a rocklike body. Cutting a stone roper open reveals its treasure hiddin inside its
gizzard. A typical stone roper stands 5 feet tall and weighs about 1,000
pounds. Stone ropers speak their own dialect of the roper language.
Most encounters with a stone roper begin when it fires its strong, sticky
strands. A stone roper attacks anything that comes within 50 feet by
suddenly shooting out its tentacle strands. It prefers to attack two victims
at once, each with three strands. If a stone roper hits with a strand attack,
the strand latches onto the opponent's body. This deals no damage but
drags the stuck opponent 10 feet closer each subsequent round unless
that creature breaks free, which requires a successful open doors roll. A
stone roper can draw in a creature within 10 feet of itself and bite with a
+2 attack bonus in the same round. A strand has 10 hp. Severing a
strand deals no damage to a stone roper. If a strand is severed, the stone
roper can extrude a new one on its next turn.
The first two victims successfully attacked are injected with the stone
roper's venom. Twice per day, a stone roper can secrete venom from each
of its strands. A creature hit by a strand must succeed on a saving throw
or be paralyzed. A paralyzed creature appears to have been turned to stone
(close inspection reveals that this is in fact not the case). One round after
being paralyzed, the victim recovers and must succeed on a saving throw
or act as if under the effects of a charm person spell for 2d4 rounds. A
charmed creature fights for and defends the stone roper. If the stone roper
is killed, a charmed victim acts as if under the effects of a confusion spell
for 1d6+2 rounds.
If the venom fails, the stone roper continues to hold the creatures. A
stone roper's strands sap an opponent's strength. Anyone grabbed by a
strand must succeed on a saving throw or take 2d4 points of strength
damage.
A stone roper can hold itself so still it appears to be a statue. An observer
must succeed on a roll of 1 on 1d6 to notice the stone roper is really alive.
A stone roper can automatically detect the location of anything within
200 feet that is in contact with the ground.

Credit: The Stone Roper (Storoper) originally appeared in the First Edition
module A3 Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast,
1980) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Allen
Hammack and Gary Gygax.

Obstacle
While exploring the underworld, a band of adventurers will experience a
truly frightening thing - an earthquake. The quake is not terribly damaging
- folks might be knocked prone, dust will fall, but nobody is hurt or put
through a major inconvenience.
As they delve deeper, they come across a newly created crevasse. About
20 feet below the upper edge of the crevasse there is a rend in the granite
forming a small cave. A band of 1d3+2 gnomes are in this cave trying to
avoid the tendrils of a stone roper at the top of a crevasse.
The crevasse is about 30 feet wide, the near side about 6 feet below the
far side. The crevasse is 300 feet deep, with a number of dead gnomes at
the bottom. The gnomes were transporting expensive spices worth 1,300
gp when the event happened, and though some of the casks they were
transporting are now broken at the bottom of the crevasse, about 400 gp
worth are still intact.

Ryven
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d6), or 1 weapon (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Rage
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Ryven are known as badger-folk by those of other races. In
appearance, they resemble man-sized, bipedal badgers. Ryvens
are 5 or 6 feet tall and weigh about 450 pounds. Their arms are
broad and well-muscled as are their legs. Their hands and feet
end in sharpened claws with elongated nails. Ryvens have short,
bushy, brown tails. Their bodies are covered in brown or gray
fur with lighter coloration on the abdomen and chest; facial fur
is brown or gray with black patches or rings. A long stripe of
white fur runs from its nose, across its head, and down its back,
terminating near its tail. A ryven that is injured in combat can fly
into a berserk rage three times per day, clawing and biting with a
+2 bonus to its attacks and damage.

The Animal King
A group of monk's sits in a circle in a small marble and glass
atrium to the side of the road. Columns holding up the atrium's
roof depict a wild hunt, with rabbits and foxes outrunning hounds.
They wear long red robes and hoods that cover them from head to
foot. Their hands are folded into the elaborate robes. Mesh screens
sewn into the hoods conceal their features. Their whispered chant is a
soft hum radiating out of the quiet atrium.
The six monks surround a glass spindle rising four feet high in the
middle of the atrium. A delicate crystal decanter filled with a golden
liquid sits in a niche carved into the glass. The liquid gleams in a shaft of
sunlight filtering through stained-glass panels set in the roof.
The monks are 6 ryven awaiting the resurrection of their true
leader. They don’t speak and don’t make a move to stop anyone
approaching the decanter. They stop chanting in anticipation
should a PC prepare to drink the draught. The golden liquid tastes
like elderberries. It refills automatically once set back into the
glass pillar.
PCs who drink from the decanter have a 1 in 6 chance of gaining
an animal trait: whiskers, a bushy fox tail, pointed ears, fur, etc.
Those who gain an animal characteristic further have another 1
in 6 chance of turning fully into a ryven. If this happens, the ryven
monks bow to their newly risen leader. Those who don’t gain an
animal trait are healed for 1d6 points of damage. This healing occurs
only if the liquid is sipped from the crystal decanter within the confines
of the atrium. It loses all potency if removed.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sabrewing
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 wing slashes (1d6+2)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: +1 weapons to hit
Move: 6/12 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A sabrewing is a 6-foot tall, muscular humanoid with two large, leathery
wings in place of its arms. Each wing has a plate of razor-sharp and rigid
bone on its outer side. Its flesh is rubbery and black in color while the
bony edges of its wings are slate gray or dull silver. A sabrewing's head
is hairless and humanoid in appearance. Its eyes are small and slitted
with golden pupils. A sabrewing's long, muscular legs end in three-toed
clawed feet and its mouth is wide and filled with rows of sharp teeth.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The King and Eye
King Narsh II is uneasy. A mysterious box arrived for him three days
ago, with no note or any information about who sent it. The courier
vanished before he could be detained and questioned. Inside the felt-lined
container was the plucked-out eye of a storm giant staring up at him.
As King Narsh stared into the bloody depths of the eye, he realized he
was seeing through the pupil into another plane of existence. He spied
on jagged citadels of stone and iron that rose into the dull sky. He saw a
forest of moving steel blades slicing all life to ribbons. The king recoiled
at the visions, but the damage was done as a hairless head appeared in the
vision and two golden eyes stared malevolently at the king.
Two sabrewings are zeroing in on the royal court, and await the chance
to strike and slay the king spying on their home world. The king requires
protection, and offers PCs a hefty fortune (and the storm giant's eye,
which serves as a crystal ball) if they’ll protect him.

Sand Kraken
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 10 tentacles (1d6) and bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Constrict, camouflage
Move: 0 (immobile)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Sand kraken are bloated, eyeless, formless octopi ranging 15 feet across.
The coloration of a sand kraken is a revolting pale yellow. From its
shapeless body sprouts ten long tentacles tipped with cruel barbed pads. A
sand kraken lies hidden under the desert sands, waiting to use its tentacles
to grab prey passing above it. If a sand kraken hits a single opponent with
two or more tentacles, it constricts the victim for 1d6 damage and drags
him into the sand to the kraken's mouth for automatic bite damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

House of Sand
The desert village of Rankaap was abandoned 100 years ago during
the War of the Winds when scouring blasts of desert air lifted the sand in
a scouring wall. A dozen or so stone buildings sit abandoned, the doors
and windows open to the surrounding desert. Heat rises past 130 degrees
during the day, and plummets to 30 degrees at night. Most of the buildings
are dilapidated, but a two-story building still appears habitable.
The outer stone walls of the manor house are sandblasted smooth from
the driving winds, but the interior remains relatively intact. Tables and
chairs, paintings, and other fixtures can be found in almost every room,
although up to six feet of drifting sand covers the floors and objects.
The drifts are less on the second floor, but the wooden floors still creak
ominously because of the weight of the sand.
A gold chandelier with crystal glass globes hangs from the 15-foot-high
ceiling of the 20-foot wide family room on the first floor. The room is
bare of furniture. A smooth layer of sand three feet deep appears to fill
the room. In fact, the sand is closer to 12 feet deep after the wooden
floor collapsed into a wine cellar. The splintered furniture rests amid the
wreckage of the wine racks below tons of sand.
A sand kraken lairs in the basement, waiting for creatures to enter the
family room above.

Sand Stalker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d6+2 + poison)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Paralytic poison, sound lure
Move: 15/12 (burrow)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Sand stalkers are aggressive 12-foot-long hunting spiders with light
gray underbellies. Desert dwellers, sand stalkers burrow just beneath the
sand, leaving only their front forelegs exposed. The wind plays over their
forelegs, producing an eerie flute-like sound that attracts and hypnotizes
prey into approaching the creature (save to resist). A sand stalker's bite
delivers a poison that paralyzes its prey (save avoids) so they can be
consumed at the creature's leisure.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley.

Wind in the Willows
A small oasis sits among the desert dunes, the 30-foot-wide pool of
clear water surrounded by swaying reeds. Stunted palm trees stand about
the lake, their roots draped into the placid water. A light breeze plays a
trilling melody of notes as it flits through the reeds.
No animal tracks approach the oasis, despite the harsh desert stretching
for miles around the tiny patch of serenity. The water is clear and
refreshing, although it has a slight mineral taste.
The real danger is a sand stalker that lives under the sand among the
reeds growing wild around the small pond. The creature has its hollow
forelegs sticking up among the reeds to create the music drifting around
the area.

Sandling
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Resistance to edged weapons (50%), vulnerability
to water
Move: 12/9 (burrowing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

This creature appears to be a large snake formed of earth and sand. A
slit seems to function as the creature's mouth.

Sandlings are creatures from the Elemental Plane of Earth. A sandling
in its natural form resembles a mound of sand that covers a 10-foot area.
They are most often summoned to the Material Plane by clerics and
wizards, though on occasion a sandling slips through a vortex connecting
the Elemental Plane of Earth to the Material Plane.
Sandlings live on a diet of minerals and cannot digest plants, herbs,
meat, or other substances. Opponents killed by a sandling are left for
scavengers.

Sandlings have no real society and are highly solitary in nature. Though
they harbor no ill-will towards others of their kind, it is very rare to find
more than one sandling operating near another. Reproduction methods
among sandlings is unknown to sages but it is believed they create others
of their kind by division (that is, an adult sandling splits into two or more
smaller creatures).

A typical sandling is 10 feet long but can grow to a length of 20 to 25
feet.

For every 2 gallons of water that hit a sandling, it is slowed (as the slow
spell) for 1 round (no save).

Little Maker of Death
A band of evil masterminds erected a stone pagoda in the middle of a
woodland of towering teaks. The pavilion is constructed for pearly white
stones quarried on the Elemental Plane of Earth and then expertly cut
in the workshop of an ancient house of svirfneblins, impressing within
each stone a three-dimensional rune of mithral. These runes, properly
assembled as they now are, turn the pavilion into a terrible engine of
destruction. All the pavilion lacks is a final trigger, a six-pointed star
carved from an immense opal.

The star trigger was lost, and the mad elementalists thwarted, by a band
of paladins from a nearby city-state. The star opal is now inlaid into the
large, round teak table that dominates the great hall of their chapter house.
The paladins and their soldiers wear a multi-colored patchwork sixpointed star on their mantles, for it has become the symbol of their order.
Should the star opal be brought into the pavilion and placed in the space
awaiting it in the ceiling, the pavilion will become the single safe haven
in a hemisphere of destruction that grows outward from the pavilion
at the rate of 1 mile per day, until it finally extends to a radius of 500
miles. Within this hemisphere the earth is wracked by quakes, landslides
and tornadoes. Lakes and rivers are swallowed by the earth, leaving
behind a parched, broken landscape fit only for monsters and the tougher
humanoids.

Within the pavilion, there is a pit of sand that is warm to the touch. A
large sandling dwells in this pit, emerging only to attack those who do
not identify themselves as friends by pricking their fingers with copper
needles and dropping those needles into the sand pit. All others are
marked for destruction.

Credit: The Sandling originally appeared in the First Edition module A4 In the
Dungeons of the Slave Lords (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and later in
the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is
used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Lawrence
Schick.

Sandman
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Strike (1d4 plus sleep)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Sleep aura, resistance to non-magical ranged
weapons (50%), magic resistance (25%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Sandmen are silicate creatures from the Elemental Plane of Earth. They
appear as slender humans constructed of sand. They have delicate facial
features and long, slender fingers. Their purpose on the Material Plane is
unknown, but spellcasters often summon them when they want to protect
someone or something. Though sandmen have chaotic tendencies many
willingly serve summoners of other alignments.
Sandmen have an immense dislike for humans (reasons unknown) and
attack them on sight—human spellcasters take heed when employing
their services!
A sandman can radiate a 20-foot-radius sleep aura as it pleases. A
creature in the area must succeed on a saving throw or be affected as
though by a sleep spell cast by an 8th level magic-user. There is no limit
to the number of Hit Dice a sandman can affect with this aura. A creature
that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the same sandman's
sleep aura for one day.
A creature struck by or touching a sandman must also succeed on a
saving throw or be affected as though by a sleep spell cast by an 8th level
magic-user. Again, there is no limit to the number of Hit Dice a sandman
can affect with this ability.

Credit: The Sandman originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Roger
Musson.

Bring Me a Dream
In the stony desert that covers a great peninsula you might come across
the palace of a great conqueror. The palace is constructed of sandstone
and boasts 1,000 grand pillars, some rising as high as 50 feet, over one
hundred chambers and a network of troughs fed by a spring. The troughs
allow the palace servants to cultivate a massive garden in the center of the
palace that features fruit trees, vines, vegetables, song birds and a variety
of small game. Most of the palace's needs are fulfilled by tribute from
more fertile lands conquered by the sultan with the help of a slim whistle.
The whistle is carved from the finger bones of an elemental earth
dragon. It looks like ivory but has the strength of steel. The whistle
always hangs around the sultan's neck. By blowing into the whistle and
concentrating on an object made of stone, the sultan can turn that stone
into sand. Obviously, this has been most helpful in toppling the walls of
many towns and strongholds. The whistle can also be used to summon a
gang of 1d8+1 sandmen, who serve the sultan loyally for a period of one
week before seemingly blowing away on an etheric wind back to their
home on the Elemental Plane of Earth. A gang of these sandmen dwell
in the sandpits that surround the palace, where glassblowers do a steady
trade in art glass.
The sultan can usually be found in his gallery, admiring glass statues of
lovely jinni swathed in veils and striking fetching poses. These twelve
statues are actually sandmen that have been trapped in glass. With a
blow of his whistle, they return to their normal form and become fierce
guardians. Hidden behind a wall in the gallery is the sultan's treasure:
17,540 sp, 3,820 gp and a brass idol of a terrifying efreet with carnelian
eyes (worth 6,000 gp, weighs 1,000 pounds).

Scarecrow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Strike (1d6 plus fascination)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Fascination, immunity to cold, double damage
from fire
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

The animated scarecrow is nearly indistinguishable from a normal
scarecrow. Close examination, however, reveals a tiny spark of red light in
its eyes (1 in 6 chance to notice). Each scarecrow is unique in construction
and design, but most are about 6 feet tall, constructed of wood and ropes,
and stuffed with straw or grass. Scarecrows are most often used as
guardians to keep out would-be treasure hunters or trespassers.

Any living creature within 30 feet meeting the gaze of a scarecrow must
succeed on a saving throw or be fascinated for as long as the scarecrow is
“alive” or remains within 300 feet of the fascinated person. A fascinated
creature can take no actions but can defend themselves. A fascinated
creature can attempt a new saving throw any time it is attacked. The touch
of a scarecrow fascinates a foe in the same way its gaze does.

Construction Each scarecrow varies in appearance: one may have a stuffed straw
head, for example, while another may have a pumpkin for its head.
Whatever the differences, scarecrows do have some elements in common:
their bodies and all limbs are constructed of wood and bound by ropes;
their clothes are almost always dirty and ragged; and most scarecrows are
stuffed with straw or grass. Regardless of the materials used, unguents
and special powders totaling 500 gp are also required.
Assembling the body requires a skilled woodworker and a magic-user
of at least 12th level that can cast charm person, hold person and geas.

Credit: The Scarecrow originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Roger
Musson.

Not For Scaring Crows
A solitary scarecrow leans against a bower of roses that marks the
gateway to a crumbling stone farmhouse. The scarecrow has a burlap face
painted with the face of a fierce warrior. On its frame of sticks is draped
an ancient, tattered robe. For hands it has bamboo rakes.
The scarecrow was constructed by a magic-user called Kimbuk, a leader
of rebellious peasants, to guard their hideout in the ruined farmhouse. The
farmhouse belonged to a popular yeoman farmer who made the mistake
of standing up to the fell lord that has seized power in this land. The rebel
band is made up of 1d30+20 peasants (1d6 HD) who arm themselves with
little or no armor, bamboo shields and a collection of farm implements,
spears and short bows.
The fell lord in question is a rakshasa lich called the Venerable Claw. He
is served by a band of 1d20+20 scythe wielding berserkers. Prophecies
state that the Venerable Claw can only be destroyed with his own twohanded sword, a handsome weapon edged in silver runes with a deep
azure sapphire in the hilt. The sapphire is the lich's phylactery, and an
ancient curse by a vanquished wise woman ensures that if the sword
strikes the Venerable Claw, his phylactery will shatter. The peasants seek
the sword, but it has been well hidden in a misty swamp guarded by a
nine bog mummies.
The Venerable Claw dwells in a fine manor of white stones and gracefully
arched roofs of blue-green slates. He walks by day swathed in silk robes
and wearing a porcelain demon mask, and is always accompanied by ten
of his toughest warriors. The Claw's treasure consists of 21,500 sp in the
form of 10 pound trade bars (there are 215 in all), 2,060 gp and a moss
agate imbroglio depicting the goddess of mercy (worth 165 gp).

Screaming Devilkin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Tail-barb (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Scream
Move: 3/12 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Shrill wails echoing through the night signal the arrival of a screaming
devilkin. Screaming devilkins are smallish beasts, humanoid in
appearance but with frail and spindly arms and legs. These weak
limbs are nearly useless for combat and locomotion, but the screaming
devilkin makes up for this disability with its bat-like wings. Although
screaming devilkins are fast fliers, they are not particularly agile on the
wing. Screaming devilkins also have a long, muscular, barbed tail that
is their primary means of physical attack. It should be noted that despite
its appearance and name, the screaming devilkin has no connection with
outsiders of any type.

A typical screaming devilkin is 3 feet tall and has a wingspan of about
5 feet. Its skin is reddish-brown in color and its eyes are black. Its tail is
about 2-1/2 feet long.

A screaming devilkin howls continuously. This painful howling affects
all creatures within 60 feet that hear it. Affected creatures must succeed on
a saving throw or can take no actions other than defending themselves for
as long as the screaming devilkin continues to scream. A dazed creature
can attempt a new save each round to break the effect. A creature that
successfully saves cannot be affected again by same screaming devilkin's
scream for one day.

Conversation, even shouting, is impossible within 60 feet of a screaming
devilkin using this ability. Spellcasters in the area must succeed on
a saving throw each time they try to cast a spell. Silence negates the
devilkin's scream for the duration of the spell.

Credit: The Screaming Devilkin originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Philip
Masters.

Invasion of the Baby Snatchers
In the boughs of a gigantic banyan tree in a steamy rain forest, there
dwells a pack of 1d4+1 screaming devilkins. The devilkins have made a
home for themselves in what was originally a giant wasp nest. The nest
looks like a great globule of dried mud, twigs and leaves, and measures
approximately 15 feet in diameter and 25 feet tall. The presence of the
devilkins has driven the other inhabitants of the banyan far away, and
the wicked creatures are now occupying themselves by attacking the
scattered villages of the area, including a sprawling fishing village and
a tribe of hunters that dwell within in a palisade of polished iron trees
in mud brick houses decorated with bits of jagged crystal mined in the
hills. The hunters are known for their pet worgs, and are willing to trade a
trained worg for the services of a band of adventurers. The devilkins have
proven too powerful for the hunters, and they have lost several children
to the beasts already.
The devilkin's lair contains about 80 gp worth of the copper trade
bracelets used by the people of the rain forest (the equivalent of 8,000 cp)
as well as a lapis lazuli brooch that, when placed upon one's forehead,
leads them to pure water and a small jasper worth 3 gp.

Screaming Skull
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: None
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Cacophony, insanity, magic missile, +1 weapons to
hit, immune to magic
Move: 0 (immobile)
Alignment: Neutral
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A screaming skull is the skull of a humanoid or other creature, bleached
white, and with a single gemstone of varying size and type embedded
into each eye socket. Whenever a being approaches within 30 feet, a
screaming skull emits an ear-shattering roar that does 1d6 damage to
creatures within 60 feet. The screaming lasts for 1d4 rounds. Anyone
touching the golem must save or be driven insane for 1d6 hours. Once per
round, a screaming skull can shoot up to 3 magic missiles from its eyes
(1d4+1 points of damage each). Disintegrate slows a screaming skull.
Cold-based spells heal a screaming skull. They are immune to all other
magic.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Swinging Skulls
This 20-foot-by-20-foot room is filled with random clutter. A small
cauldron sits on the stone floor, surrounded by animal totems decorated
with colorful feathers. A fireplace in the east wall is filled with embers,
and the wall is covered in a thick layer of creosote. Hanging from the
10-foot-high ceiling on knotted twine are various bits of bone, including
femurs, a crooked spine and numerous skulls of various animals and
humanoids. Each of these skeletal remains is decorated with odd trinkets,
feathers or swirls of color. The bones dance, sway and swing on their
strings as if alive. Deer antlers are fixed to the walls.
The room belongs to a temperamental witch named Gurthred the
Shriveled who collects remains of her kills. She hangs the assorted bones
as good-luck charms to protect herself. Gurthred casts a simple spell on
the strings to make them move on their own to give the bones “life” as
they swing wildly
To protect her trinkets, Gurthred hung a screaming skull amid her
treasures. The cacophony golem swings on a length of twine, waiting
for someone to bump into it before it begins to wail. The golem is tasked
with protecting the room from anyone trying to make off with the random
bones.
Gurthred keeps a metal lockbox in the embers of the fire that contains
100 gp, a small ruby (50 gp) and a potion of levitation that's been spoiled
by the heat. Anyone drinking it must save or float helplessly into the
sky without control for 4d6 rounds before the potion wears off
and they fall back to earth.

Scylla
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 6 bites (1d10+3)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Boil water, scalding blast
Move: 6/18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

Scyllas are great sea-monsters about 20 feet long with a rounded lower
body, four large fins, a short tail, and six heads, each perched on top of
a long snake-like neck. A scylla is gray-blue to dark gray in color with a
lighter shaded underbelly. Its fins are gray-blue to dark gray. Its eyes are
golden or gray and each mouth is lined with triple rows of whitish-gray
teeth. Scyllas can grow to a length of 50 feet. The body of a scylla is
extremely hot, and causes the waters around them to boil. The heated
water does 3d6 points of damage. A scylla can gulp the boiling water and
blast it in a line of scalding steam. Each blast does 3d6 points of damage
(save for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Back to the Surface
A plume of smoke and ash rises above the ocean above the Vestus Maw
volcano. The violent eruptions are slowly pushing the ancient city of
Pompellos to the surface again, nearly 300 years after it sank beneath
the ocean waves. A scylla, the city's original defender, slithers through
the still-partially submerged streets, awakening to once again protect the
city's treasures. The scylla swims through the wide columns lining the
streets, and circles the island, creating crashing waves. It blows spouts of
superheated water high into the air to warn off ships.
The scylla originally protected the city from ships seeking to reach the
city's shores without flying the proper flag. That flag design was forgotten
long ago, so any ship approaching now is considered an enemy by the
deadly sea serpent.

Scythe Tree
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  4 scythe-branches (2d4)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Resistance to slashing weapons
(50%), double damage from fire, surprise
in woodlands on a roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Scythe trees are malevolent plant creatures
found in heavily forested areas where they
naturally blend in with normal trees. Scythe
trees are carnivorous by nature and draw
very little sustenance from sun, air, or water,
preferring a diet of dryad or elf flesh.
A scythe tree, on average, is 20 feet tall,
but may reach or exceed heights of 30 feet.
It weighs about 3,500 pounds and has a trunk
diameter of 3 feet. Its bark is dark brown, shading
darker as it nears the roots. What few leaves a scythe
tree has are reddish-brown (and do not change color or
fall out as the seasons change).
The branches of a scythe tree resemble wicked-curving scythes
(this is where the tree gets its name). The scar that appears
on the trunk is the tree's mouth (it appears as a scar when
closed). Scythe trees hate treants and dryads and attack both
on sight (though a scythe tree usually only confronts a treant
when it outnumbers it).
A scythe tree speaks its own language and the language of treants.
Some (15%) can also speak the language of dryads and wood elves.

Little Mother's Judgment
Just beyond the crowded streets of a great city there is a network of
alleys that rarely see the light of day, for they are hemmed in by tall
buildings. In the center of this maze of passages there is an exceptionally
lovely old building that was once a monastery but is now used as the
headquarters of a brotherhood of seven butchers. The butchers are the
adopted sons of a wicked fox maiden who has become the de facto
(and secret) ruler of the old city through the use of guile
and fear. The Little Mother's sons are all assassins. The
gang primarily run a protection racket. A number of her
rivals and hold-outs have disappeared under mysterious
circumstances, keeping everybody else in line.
The ground floor of the monastery is run as a tea house that serves
a heady oolong and a spicy soup infused with jasmine. Little Mother
has a small table in the rear of the teahouse. The table is obscured by
a lovely frame depicting crane maidens bathing in a waterfall. She sits
behind the table, her eldest son by her side, sipping oolong and seeing one
petitioner after another. Some petitioners come asking favors and others
are summoned to make an account for themselves.
Those who are brought before the Little Mother because they have
displeased her might be forgiven if they have enough gold, or instead lead
into the old monastery's courtyard and told to make their way to a stone
bench adorned with lion heads sitting beneath a strange tree and await the
Little Mother's judgment. The tree is, of course, a scythe tree, and there
mere fact that the person has been lead into the courtyard is proof that
Little Mother has made her judgment. At the sound of a brass bell, the
scythe tree strikes and Little Mother's reign of fear continues.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

SEA SERPENTS

Nearly as old as the dragons that roam the sky are the sea serpents, great snakelike creatures that have roamed the
oceans for ages. Unlike the classical dragon, these great, scaly, serpentine beasts are generally agreed to be a product
of evolution, though many suspect magical influence, either deliberate or natural, somewhere in their evolution.
Whatever their origins, sea serpents are a highly varied species, with a
great variation in size, coloration, intellect, and temperament. However,
all sea serpents bear certain similarities. They are long, serpentine,
warm-blooded creatures that closely resemble snakes in appearance,
though they all have two sets of flippers, which may be large or so small
and atrophied as to be nearly unnoticeable. Sea serpents are aquatic
creatures, though some can make their way about on land. All sea
serpents can breathe both water and air with equal efficiency, another
fact that distinguishes them from marine mammals and reptiles. Further,
all sea serpents are sentient, with an intellect ranging from little greater
than moronic to supra-genius level.
One trait that sea serpents share in common with their draconic brethren
is a sense of innate superiority, a feeling that they are masters of the sea, at
least in whatever manner they choose to pursue their expertise.
Unlike dragons, however, sea serpents are not distinguished by color or
age category. And while some species are as acquisitive as dragons, others

have no interest in hoarding wealth, and live lives little better than beasts.
All sea serpents can speak and understand Aquatic, and many know
Draconic as well. The more intelligent species may also learn the languages
of marine civilizations, or the languages of sea-traveling surface dwellers.
Due to their physical similarities, sea serpents use fairly consistent
tactics in combat situations. All sea serpents have venomous bites, and
they use this to their advantage to slow or immobilize multiple attackers
so they can concentrate on one foe. In addition to their lethal bite, all sea
serpents have the ability to ensnare prey in their coils as a giant constrictor
does and crush the life out of them. The larger sea serpents may even use
this constriction attack against sea vessels, and mariners in their smoky
dens delight in recounting tales of horror and woe of great serpents that
splinter hulls and then devour the helpless sailors in the water.
Because they are sentient beings, sea serpents can often be reasoned with,
even if the reasoning is no more complex than simple intimidation. They are
adaptable to circumstances, and none throw themselves into battle rashly.

Sea Serpent, Brine
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: bite (4d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Breath weapon, constriction, swallow whole
Move: 20 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 18/3,800

This 60-foot serpentine creature has two sets of large flippers and a wide
body. A finned crest runs the length of its back, head to tail. A brine sea
serpent can release a blast of acid and salt water in a 50-foot cone dealing
6d6 points of damage (save for half). These beasts swallow their prey
whole on a roll 4 higher than the needed number, and always on a natural
20. Swallowed victims take 8d6 points of damage each round. After a
successful bite, a brine sea serpent can constrict automatically to deal 4d6
points of damage.

The Icebound Terror
A small galleon sits atop an iceberg floating in the otherwise calm sea.
The ship looks battered but possibly still seaworthy. The iceberg extends
20 foot above sea level and has a rough diameter of about 80 feet. The
top of the ice appears to have supported life for a while. The remains
of a small campfire, utensils, sleeping mats and skeletal fish waste all
show signs of recent survivors from the ship. None of them remain on the
berg. A brine sea serpent has hallowed out the core of the chunk of ice.
It uses the galleon as bait to draw in potential prey. It exits the cavity in
the iceberg through a tube below the iceberg or through a hole in the top
covered by the ship. The brine sea serpent has accumulated some treasure
it keeps in the interior of the iceberg. Among the loot of sunken ships are
a rusted iron statue of a triton king, a bag of pearls (8d12, 25gp each), 23
anchors, a bronze church bell, a giant-sized scepter topped with a garnet
the size of a man's head and a frozen satyr.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Patrick Lawinger.

Sea Serpent, Deep Hunter
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: bite (4d10)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Constrict, poison, swallow whole
Move: 0/24 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4,400

Deep hunters are smooth sea serpents with scales the size of a large
shield. These beasts swallow their prey whole on a roll 4 higher than
the needed number, or if the serpent rolls a natural 20 to hit. After a
successful bite, a deep hunter sea serpent can constrict and deal 4d10
points of damage. Their bite inflicts a lethal poison (save resists).

Flounder
A small galleon thrashes in the sea. Sailors scream in terror as the ship is
tossed about the waves and sometimes goes underwater completely. A huge
winch on the galleon secures a chain and leathery tube that extend into the
water. The chain and tube connect to an iron sphere with glass windows.
Ollie Nematoad, a halfling inventor, explores the sea's depths inside
the rudimentary diving bell. A deep sea hunter snatched Ollie and his
diving bell, but the contraption is now lodged in the serpent's jaws. The
sea serpent thrashes about trying to dislodge the sphere. It is angry and
aggressive. If the PCs rescue him, Ollie would gladly reveal the locations
of the sunken treasure he has found, absentmindedly neglecting to
mention the various dangers.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Patrick Lawinger.

Sea Serpent, Fanged
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Constrict, poison
Move: 0/18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A fanged sea serpent is 12 to 15 feet long and 5 feet thick. Its scales
are thick and hard, which slows it somewhat in water but provides good
protection. Fanged sea serpents tend to travel in packs. On a successful
bite, a fanged sea serpent deals 1d8 points of automatic constriction
damage. Their bite inflicts a lethal poison (save resists).

Serpent Surprise
Recent storms caused a backwash of seawater into the neighboring
rivers and sewers of the Eminence. The water backs up into wells and
basements of the lower city. The city has incurred many problems as
result. The arrival of fanged sea serpent has led to perhaps the worst of
the troubles. The serpent seeks easy prey through the sewers. It surprises
pedestrians by popping out of sewer grates or bursting through the
floorboards of buildings after coming up through the flooded cellars.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Patrick Lawinger.

Sea Serpent, Gilded
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Constrict, magic or gold weapons needed to hit,
poison
Move: 0/18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A gilded sea serpent is about 8 feet long and 2 feet thick. Its body scales
shine with the brilliant luster of gold. It has a long, narrow crocodilian
snout and a cluster of antenna-like whiskers sweeping back from just
above its jaws. Their skins can be crafted into exceptional armor. On
a successful bite, a gilded sea serpent deals 1d8 points of automatic
constriction damage. Their bite also inflicts poison (save resists) that
numbs the flesh and induces a catatonic stupor.

Golden Bliss Golden bliss is a drug made from the venom of a gilded sea
serpent. A serpent that is milked of its venom produces enough
poison to make 2d4 doses of golden bliss. When inhaled, the
drug produces a euphoric catatonia that lasts 10-30 minutes,
with a secondary effect being a –4 drain to Wisdom that lasts
1 week. Golden bliss also temporarily increases Charisma by
+4 and provides complete protection against mind-influencing
magic lasting 1 week. Golden bliss is highly addictive. Each time
an addict goes without golden bliss long enough to experience
withdrawal, there is a 25% chance that the first point of Wisdom
loss suffered is permanent.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Patrick Lawinger.

The Chariot of the Triton King
In a serene lagoon filled with silver sand sits an enormous chariot made
of golden shells. The Chariot of the Triton King rests here in this secluded
lagoon. The boat-like chariot does not have any wheels and sits atop a
column of white coral. A bridle made of gold chains droops into the
water. Sea elves stole the chariot long ago and hid it above the water to
prevent the tritons from finding it. A cluster of 1d6+2 gilded sea serpents
guards the chariot. The tritons desperately want the chariot returned,
although they may not have a friendly disposition to those having it in
their possession.
The chariot can comfortably hold five man-sized beings. Once grasped,
the reins summon eight gilded sea serpents to pull and protect the chariot's
occupants. While the gilded sea serpents draw the chariot, it moves with
the speed and grace of a dolphin. The chariot can move atop the water or
submerged. Once activated, a bubble of infinite air surrounds the chariot
while underwater. Occupants are free to move on or off the chariot, but
suffer normal water consequences once they leave the conveyance's safety.

Sea Serpent, Shipbreaker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 24
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: bite (5d10)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Constrict, poison, swallow whole
Move: 2/24 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 26/6,200

The devastating shipbreaker sea serpent is more than 120 feet long
and 15 feet thick. Its body scales are dark gray-brown, festooned with
barnacles, seaweed, and other sea life. Its maw is the size of a large
wagon, with teeth the size of great swords. The legendary shipbreaker is
thought to be the largest of the sea serpents, a true behemoth that rules the
seas. These beasts swallow their prey whole on a roll 4 higher than the
number needed to hit, or on a roll of natural 20. A shipbreaker can crush
even the mightiest seagoing vessels in its great coils. With a successful
bite, a shipbreaker sea serpent does 5d10 points of automatic constriction
damage. Their bite also inflicts a lethal poison (save resists).

Poseidon's Horn
Drudgery's Cove has been a safe haven for ships for as long as anyone
can remember. This city-state within a 6-mile-wide volcanic crater serves
as a protected port along the busy coast. The city is cut off from easy land
access by the immense cliff wall that rises around and above the city.
Drudgery's Cove sits on a sandy expanse at the base of the crater. The
other half of the six-mile-wide crater is filled with natural breakers and a
geothermal lagoon.
Since it has few laws and no naval force, Drudgery's Cove is a safe
haven for pirates, slave traders and smugglers. The city honors Poseidon
(or some other sea-related deity that fits the Game Referee's campaign).
No other shrines or temples exist in Drudgery's Cove.
A retired pirate named Captain Ikas Storn oversees the city. For reasons
long-forgotten, a shipbreaker sea serpent guards the city. A 60-foot-long
curving horn carved from fossilized coral sits embedded in volcanic slag
at the city's center. Stairs cut into the volcanic rock wind up the rock
to the human-sized mouthpiece. The horn summons the shipbreaker to
defend Drudgery's Cove.

When the Bubble Bursts
A giant bubble pops out of the Reaping Sea in an
explosion of water and flies nearly 100 feet into the
sky. Inside the bubble are the splintered remains
of the Lusty Sail, a merchant vessel attacked three
days ago by a shipbreaker sea serpent. A wily
magic-user on board the vessel cast a spell that
engulfed the Lusty Sail in a solid air-filled bubble
just before the serpent bit down on the ship's hull.
The bubble expanded to fill the creature's mouth and
became stuck in the serpent's open jaw. The monstrosity
dove into the black, icy depths. The crew died and the
ship was reduced to kindling within the first day as the sea
serpent violently shook its head back and forth trying to
dislodge the bubble.
The serpent finally shook the bubble free, and the airfilled orb rocketed to the surface near the PCs’ ship.
The bubble pops when it smacks heavily into the water
in a violent splash that sends plumes of water soaring
into the air.
The serpent is angry and aggressive and chases the
bubble to the surface. It leaps from the water, looking
for the ship that caused it so much pain. It attacks any
ship on the surface.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Patrick Lawinger.

Sea Serpent, Spitting
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Acid spit, constrict, poison
Move: 4/18 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A spitting sea serpent is roughly 15 to 18 feet long, with a
girth of up to 3 feet. They are covered with rough-edged
scales of brown, green, or blue, giving their hides
a mottled appearance. With a successful bite, a
spitting sea serpent deals 1d8 points of automatic
constriction damage. A spitting sea serpent
can eject a sticky glob of concentrated acidic
mucous (2d6 points of damage) up to twice a
round, with a range of 60 feet. Their bite inflicts
a numbing poison (save resists). The poison does
2d6 points of damage.

Maiden on the Rocks
A mermaid reclines atop an outcropping of rocks,
singing a beautiful melody across the ocean waves.
The mermaid holds a coral-encrusted harp while
singing the sorrowful tune. Bones and scales cover the
small rock jutting out of the sea, as well as jewelry
and other valuables. The mermaid is dehydrated and
weak, but still sings her song without missing a beat.
A spitting sea serpent lies in a hollow cavity in the rock
outcropping below the surface. For its own nefarious
reasons, it regularly snatches up mermaids and other
aquatic folk and forces them to sing and play for it. The
victims die of exposure or become a meal for the serpent
when they can’t sing anymore.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Patrick Lawinger.

Slug, Giant Sea
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d8+2)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Capsize, paralysis, swallow whole
Move: 18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

A giant sea slug is about 30 feet long and has nine sets of gills along
its body. It is variable in color: some are gray or greenish-blue; others
are white mottled with yellow or brown; and still others are gray mottled
red or yellow. It has a large set of antennae that it uses for sight and
navigation and its mouth is lined with serrated teeth used to grind its food.
Tiny threads cover the slug's body. These cilia cause paralysis for 1d6
rounds. Giant sea slugs bite if provoked, but also can rise beneath ships to
capsize them. If a sea slug rolls a natural 20 on a bite attack, it swallows
the opponent whole. A swallowed creature takes 3d8+2 points of damage
from the slug's digestive acids.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Prince's Party Barge
Prince Lander's birthday party is already the talk of the city. Queen
Mashay is sparing no expense, bringing in mastodon steaks from the
frozen northlands, jellied giant octopus tentacles cooked on barracuda
flanks, and the fabled exploding yellow custards of the barony of Anatary.
The wittiest jesters and the finest musicians are already staying in the
city's inns, awaiting their chance to honor the young prince. And the
queen has found the perfect spot for the massive party: a series of floating
barges floating on the calm waters of Loch Kinrain.
But the overprotective queen is concerned someone might attempt to
kidnap her darling boy on the night he becomes king. She's offering 1,000
gp per person (provided they can prove themselves honorable folk with
references) to help guard the party and protect her son from the threats
(mostly imagined) she's sure will surface. And she's right about a threat,
but it won’t come from outside the party but from below.
Queen Mashay disregarded the fishermen's warnings of avoiding the
lake at this time of the year, and has floated the barges across a giant
sea slug migration route. The noise, scraps of food and wine tossed into
the loch attract two of the 30-foot-long slugs, which surface beneath the
barges during the party. The barges tip, dumping partygoers and prince
alike into the chill waters.

Spider, Sea
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 3 pinchers (1d6) and 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Swallow whole
Move: 4/20 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3,200

A sea spider resembles similar arachnids found on land. Its
color ranges through various shades of blue and green with
distinct black markings. Its legs and bodies are covered with
thousands of fine, sticky hairs that trap air bubbles, which
aid in floatation and mobility. With its long, strong legs a sea
spider can propel itself underwater as easily as it can glide upon
the surface. A sea spider is about 16 feet long and resembles a
monstrous spider with fur of varying hues of blues and greens. If
a sea spider hits with its bite attack, it can swallow its opponent
whole in the next round.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene.

Spider, Sea Pelagos
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Poison, spells, resists acid, fire and cold
Move: 4/20 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4,400

This great sea spider makes its home in the deep ocean never venturing close
to the coast or shorelines. Its lair is often made in sunken ships or
underwater caverns and caves. Its legs and bodies are covered with thousands
of fine, sticky hairs that trap air bubbles, which aid in floatation and
mobility. With its long, strong legs a sea spider can propel itself underwater
as easily as it can glide upon the surface. A sea spider is about 16 feet long
and resembles a monstrous spider with fur of varying hues of blues and greens.
If a sea spider hits with its bite attack, it can swallow its opponent whole
in the next round. The bite injects a deadly poison (save resists). Any
creature that dies from the poison turns into water and flows away. Three
times per day, pelagos giant sea spiders can cast cone of cold and lightning
bolt. Once per day, they can cast stinking cloud.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene.

Island of Junk
A wide island of plankton and seaweed floats in the sea. The island
seems to be a collective mass of sea junk floating atop the waves. Small
wrecked boats, driftwood, dead sea life and other detritus float amid the
green mash. A floating bridge of solid and stable junk traverses the jumble
to the center where half of a large galleon bobs in the water. The flag of
the infamous pirate the Gray Otter flies above the bent mast. Moving
corpses peer over the edge of the ship remains. The corpses are puppets
attached to thin spider silk from a giant sea spider that stands on the
underside of the algae island. The spider uses the lures to attract would
be treasure-seekers.

Sea Wasp, Monstrous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: tentacles (1d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Poison, entangle, transparent, jet
Move: 9 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Monstrous sea wasps are deadly aquatic creatures with long, writhing and
highly poisonous tentacles. Sea wasps are translucent blue in color rendering
them nearly invisible in water. Its main body, or bell, is cubeshaped, having
four distinct sides. A bundle of 60 tentacles, which reach lengths of 50 feet
in the largest sea wasps hang from its bell. Sea wasps have four eyes, one on
each side of the bell, connected to a nerve ring inside the main body. They
have no brain, but are able to process visual information. Sea wasps float in
the water waiting for creatures to swim into their mass of tentacles. When it
detects prey in its tentacles, it folds them around the prey, and stings it.
A monstrous sea wasp's poison (particularly the larger ones) is meant to
instantly kill its prey so it does not struggle and damage the sea wasp's
delicate form. A monstrous sea wasp can jet backward in a straight line once
per round at a speed equal to four times its swim speed.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene.

Sea Wasp, Monstrous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: tentacles (1d8 + poison)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Poison, entangle, transparent, jet
Move: 15 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Monstrous sea wasps are deadly aquatic creatures with long, writhing and
highly poisonous tentacles. Sea wasps are translucent blue in color rendering
them nearly invisible in water. Its main body, or bell, is cubeshaped, having
four distinct sides. A bundle of 60 tentacles, which reach lengths of 50 feet
in the largest sea wasps hang from its bell. Sea wasps have four eyes, one on
each side of the bell, connected to a nerve ring inside the main body. They
have no brain, but are able to process visual information. Sea wasps float in
the water waiting for creatures to swim into their mass of tentacles. When it
detects prey in its tentacles, it folds them around the prey, and stings it.
A monstrous sea wasp's poison (particularly the larger ones) is meant to
instantly kill its prey so it does not struggle and damage the sea wasp's
delicate form. A monstrous sea wasp can jet backward in a straight line once
per round at a speed equal to four times its swim speed.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene.

Sea Wasp, Monstrous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: tentacles (2d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Poison, entangle, transparent, jet
Move: 15 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Monstrous sea wasps are deadly aquatic creatures with long, writhing and
highly poisonous tentacles. Sea wasps are translucent blue in color rendering
them nearly invisible in water. Its main body, or bell, is cubeshaped, having
four distinct sides. A bundle of 60 tentacles, which reach lengths of 50 feet
in the largest sea wasps hang from its bell. Sea wasps have four eyes, one on
each side of the bell, connected to a nerve ring inside the main body. They
have no brain, but are able to process visual information. Sea wasps float in
the water waiting for creatures to swim into their mass of tentacles. When it
detects prey in its tentacles, it folds them around the prey, and stings it.
A monstrous sea wasp's poison (particularly the larger ones) is meant to
instantly kill its prey so it does not struggle and damage the sea wasp's
delicate form. A monstrous sea wasp can jet backward in a straight line once
per round at a speed equal to four times its swim speed.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene.

Sea Wasp, Monstrous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: tentacles (2d8 + poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Poison, entangle, transparent, jet
Move: 18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 17/3,500

Monstrous sea wasps are deadly aquatic creatures with long, writhing and
highly poisonous tentacles. Sea wasps are translucent blue in color rendering
them nearly invisible in water. Its main body, or bell, is cubeshaped, having
four distinct sides. A bundle of 60 tentacles, which reach lengths of 50 feet
in the largest sea wasps hang from its bell. Sea wasps have four eyes, one on
each side of the bell, connected to a nerve ring inside the main body. They
have no brain, but are able to process visual information. Sea wasps float in
the water waiting for creatures to swim into their mass of tentacles. When it
detects prey in its tentacles, it folds them around the prey, and stings it.
A monstrous sea wasp's poison (particularly the larger ones) is meant to
instantly kill its prey so it does not struggle and damage the sea wasp's
delicate form. A monstrous sea wasp can jet backward in a straight line once
per round at a speed equal to four times its swim speed.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene.

The Seaweed Island
A three-mile-wide woven net of seaweed supports the Denrot Tower as
it floats atop the Sargot Sea. The tower is made of coral and white stone
encrusted with thousands of colorful shells. The tower sits atop a chunk
of thick seaweed nearly a mile deep. Tunnels descend below the tower
into the hardened mass.
The seaweed plain surrounding the tower is less dense, and filled with
plant-based creatures such as shambling mounds, sea crocodiles and
seaweed-wrapped mummies of sailors who died on the island. Thin
stretches of seaweed across the island collapse beneath weight, dropping
travelers into the sea below the island.
A monstrous sea wasp floats beneath the island, its long tentacles spread
to catch anything falling into its clutches. The sea creature jets away from
danger if attacked.

Snake, Sepia
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8) and tail sting (1d8 + poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Cocoon, poison
Move: 9/12 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A sepia snake is an anaconda-like creature that grows to be up to 30 feet
long and nearly two feet thick. Although this strange snake can fly, it has
no wings and no apparent means of airborne travel. Its scales are muddy
brown in color, with strange patterns and symbols on its dorsal side. The
tail of a sepia snake ends in a vicious-looking barbed sting that injects
a poison into victims. The eyes of a sepia snake are two large glowing
yellow orbs set in its wide, triangular head. Three times a day, a sepia
snake can fire a line of webbing up to 20 feet to cocoon a victim (save
to avoid).

Copyright Notice: Authors Erica Balsley.

Snake Charmer
Four 5-foot-diameter columns of carved marble stand at the corners of a
raised dais. Veins of purple bands swirl within the white marble. A wicker
basket sits in an oval depression carved into center of the dais. A hollow
gourd with a flute-like instrument attached to one end sits on a wooden
table beside the basket. The instrument is bright red and decorated with
small gems near a mouthpiece at the tip of the gourd.
Six web cocoons are stuck to the columns. Five of the sticky masses
contain bones, while the last holds a dehydrated, nearly comatose woman.
Slicing through the webs yields a total of 200 gp, three small garnets (30
gp each) and a ring of invisibility around a mummified finger.
If the flute-like pungi is played, the purple veins on the columns writhe
and twist into strange designs. Two rounds after the instrument's first
notes are sounded, patterns form a different symbol (as per the spell) on
each of the columns. The four symbols displayed are symbols of sleep,
fear, discord and stunning.
When the symbols appear, a sepia snake is summoned into the wicker
basket. The snake rises out of the container and floats in the center of
the room. It tries to cocoon anyone not stunned or put to sleep by the
columns.
The trapped woman is a thief named Quay who stumbled into the room
and played the instrument. She was cocooned three days ago and is barely
alive. She cannot speak or move until healed. She screams and tries to
get away from the basket if awakened.

Sepulchral Guardian
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 sword (1d8)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Disease, dread, +1 magic weapons to hit,
spell resistance (15%), immune to cold and fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

Sepulchral guardians are humanoids standing just over 6
feet tall. Their entire body, save their face, is encased in a suit
of iron. Its face, while humanoid, shows no signs of life, and its
eyes are filled with the emptiness of an automaton. Most sepulchral
guardians wield long swords, battleaxes, or other such weapons. A
sepulchral guardian weighs about 900 pounds. Sepulchral guardians
are created to guard the final resting place of a now dead creature.
Once activated, a sepulchral guardian performs its task until it is
destroyed. Any creature struck by a sepulchral guardian's slam
must make a save or contract a rotting poison that does 2d6 points
of damage per hour. Creatures seeing a sepulchral guardian must
save or flee in fear (as per the spell of the same name).

The Warden's Tomb
A 10-foot-tall iron fence cuts through the forest, vines and weeds
growing up around it. Beyond the fence is a weed-covered clearing. Onefoot-square grave markers set into the ground are aligned in perfect rows.
Each bears a single, unknown number.
Dunkire Prison is lost to memory, but its cemetery remains. The
graveyard is nearly a mile square, but overrun by the forest it was hidden
within. Hundreds of bodies are buried here, each nothing more than a
prisoner number. These were the worst of the worst who died within the
prison's walls.
A stone mausoleum in the center of the graveyard is the only structure
within the clearing. Cherry trees surround the stone building. Four carved
caryatids hold the roof. A weathered name on a marker over the door is
illegible, but the words “beloved warden” can be made out.
Inside the structure is a sarcophagus set into the tiled floor. It is carved
to resemble the man buried within. Standing before the grave is the
warden's guardian, a sepulchral guardian assigned to protect the body
from grave robbers.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene.

Shadow, Lesser
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  Incorporeal touch (1 Str)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Strength damage, blend with shadows
Move: 15 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Lesser shadows appear to be humanoids constructed of living darkness.
Though not as powerful as their stronger relatives, lesser shadows are
every bit as wicked. A lesser shadow is completely indistinguishable from
a standard shadow. A lesser shadow is 5 or 6 feet tall and weightless.
Lesser shadows do not speak.
Lesser shadows hide in darkness, springing to attack when living
opponents wander too close. Unlike normal shadows, lesser shadows do
not create spawn.
The touch of a lesser shadow deals 1 point of Strength damage to a
living foe. A creature drained to Strength 0 by a lesser shadow dies.
In any condition of illumination other than full daylight, a lesser shadow
can disappear into the shadows. Artificial illumination, even a light spell,
does not negate this ability. In shadowy areas, a lesser shadow surprises
opponents on a roll of 1-3 on 1d6.

Only the Shadows Know
While wandering through a dungeon, you come upon a door painted
bright red. Opening the red door reveals a circular room 30 feet in diameter
and shrouded in magical darkness. The walls of the room are lined with
seven doors of multiple colors - red, blue, green, yellow, purple, orange
and white - though this is not apparent in the darkness. A lantern hanging
from the ceiling. The only light that can cut through the darkness is from
the lantern, and even then the light is quite dim. Once the lantern is lit, the
darkness slowly slinks away and seven shadows are formed on the walls.
The shadows mimic the adventurers in the room, but a careful observer
can tell they are not natural. As one approaches a door, a shadow stands
in their way, tight against the door. As the person reaches for the handle of
the door, the shadow attempts to touch their hand. If the adventurers show
a capability of destroying the shadows they slink away, avoiding them or
disappearing into the actual shadows cast by the adventurers.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson.

Shark, Giant Landwalker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 13
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d10+8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Amphibious, feeding frenzy
Move: 9/18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A landwalker giant shark is a great white that has
evolved the ability to walk on its fins to leave the water
and breathe air. The shark attacks with its giant toothfilled mouth, and the smell of blood sends the beast into
a feeding frenzy where it attacks mindlessly and deals an
additional 1d4 points of damage per bite.

Blood in the Water
Sides of cow hang from the slaughterhouse ceiling,
blood dripping onto the stained wooden floor. Gore sits
in fatty blobs on the slatted floor. Blood drips through
the open slats into the Krell River that runs beneath
the building. Reddish-tinged water flecked with bits
of castoff flesh flows out of the port city of Lem.
This bloody slurry mixes with the tide at the
breakwater.
The bloody trail has lured a giant landwalker
shark into the river from its ocean home. The
monster bursts through the slat floor in a leap
that sends splinters exploding into the room.
The shark lands in the slaughterhouse in a
blood frenzy, rending cow and PC flesh
with every shake of its tooth-filled maw.
The landwalker shark focuses on PCs
before sating itself with the hanging cow
sides.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Shedu (Common)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: 2 hooves (1d6)
Saving Throw: 7
Special: Spells, etherealness, telepathy, magic resistance (30%)
Move: 12/24 (flying)
Alignment: Lawful
CL/XP: 13/2300

Shedus have the body of a chestnut-colored horse, large brownfeathered wings
and the head and face of a bearded human. They are lawful creatures found
roaming the Material Plane seeking out evil and destroying it wherever and
whenever they encounter it. Shedu aid lawful creatures in need and never
knowingly associate with chaotic creatures.  They are on good terms with
lammasu and ki-rin.

Priests and holy men sometimes seek the advice and wisdom of a shedu
and will journey great distances to find the knowledge they seek. Some
ancient cults even worship and pray to the shedu holding them up as
deities in their culture.

Shedu found on the Material Plane make their homes in abandoned and
ruined temples and shrines dedicated to gods of law.

Both shedu and greater shedu can shift from the Ethereal Plane to
the Material Plane at will. Both forms of shedu can communicate
telepathically with any creature within 100 feet that has a language.
Shedu can use the following spells at will: Astral spell (self only),
charm monster (3/day), detect evil and ESP.

Credit: The Shedu originally appeared in the pre-First Edition book Eldritch
Wizardry (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1976) and later in the First Edition
Monster Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Shedu (Greater)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 14
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  2 hooves (1d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spells, etherealness, telepathy, +1 or better
weapon to harm, protection from evil 10’ radius, magic
resistance (40%)
Move: 15/30 (flying)
Alignment: Lawful
CL/XP: 21/4700

Greater shedu can use the following spells at will: Astral spell (self
only), clairaudience, clairvoyance, detect evil, detect magic, invisibility
(self only), suggestion (2/day), telekinesis (2/day). They can also cast
spells as a 10th level cleric.

A greater shedu radiates a continuous protection from evil, 10’ radius.

Credit : The Greater Shedu originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Repent Ye Sinners
The party's travels bring it into a region of tall, sandstone pillars and
orange sands. For miles, they will see no sign of animals, plants or water
until they reach the base of a tall butte, the top of which is covered in a
thick woodland of knotty, white pines. This butte is the home of a greater
shedu called Nabirsu. A few hours of searching will eventually uncover
a cave in the base of the butte. The cave has smooth walls and extends
about 300 yards into the butte before branching into two separate sets of
stairs leading up. The first set is wide and grandiose and set with alcoves
containing brass censers set with mother of pearl and burning cones of
fragrant incense. The other set of stairs is narrow and plain, with a low
ceiling that forces one to stoop as they climb. The fragrant stairs are
guarded by a number of large panthers chained to the walls. There are
twelve panthers in all, and they are quite unfriendly. The rough stairs are
unguarded.

The fragrant stairs lead to a cave in the northern half of the butte that
opens onto a stone shelf overlooking a gorge filled with bubbling, acidic
water (1d4 damage per round). A 30-foot long rope bridge spans the gorge, and
though it is sturdy the fumes from the acid force people crossing it to make
a saving throw or become dizzy and fall into the acid.

Beyond the gorge are the woods, inhabited by a ivory-colored lions, golden
owls, serpents, squirrels, insects and other animals common to a woodland.
Encounters with 1d4 hunting lions occur on a roll of 1 on 1d6.

The rough staircase exits into a palace of golden brown marble.  This palace
is the home of a greater shedu, the tutelary spirit of the wasteland. The
shedu is fierce and unyielding. Lawful characters are warmly welcomed and
shown to comfortable chambers by the shedu's brownie servants. Neutrals are
shown to a grotto temple that holds an idol of Marduk and told to reflect on
their lives and priorities. After a few hours they are welcomed back into the
presence of the shedu and either welcomed into the lawful fold or given
supplies of fresh water and crusty bread and sent on their way.

While the others are led away, chaotic individuals are left before the shedu.
Then they are dropped into a pit. Moments later, the shedu will enter the pit
(it is quite large) in ethereal form, and in this form they are given a chance
to beg forgiveness and leave behind their wicked ways.  Should they accept,
they are helped from the pit, their equipment is taken and they are given
clothes of sackcloth, wooden staffs and supplies to see them through the
waste. Should they make it through the desert alive, the shedu will return
their goods to them and wish them well. Chaotics who refuse are attacked by
the shedu, who will flee in ethereal form if losing only to drink a healing
draught and then return again and again until the chaotics have repented or
are dead.

Fungi, Sheet
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 pseudopod (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Camouflage, engulf
Move: 15 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Sheet funguses are flat, sheet-like plant creatures about 6 feet long and
2-1/2 or 3 feet wide. It weighs about 3 pounds. Two small dark circles
“sewn” into its design function as eyes. They resemble tapestries or rugs
and use this to their advantage when hunting for food. Sheet funguses
are fond of blood and flesh, especially that of humans. If a sheet fungus
hits an opponent with its pseudopod, it can decide to engulf a victim
automatically on its next round. An engulfed opponent is held until it dies
or until the sheet fungus takes three-quarters of its hp at which time
it releases its prey and flees.

Holy Sheet
A canopy bed stands in a corner bedroom of the abandoned castle, its
yellow bedspread covered in a fine layer of dust. The poles supporting the
draping veil canopy are ringed with green mold. A holy symbol depicting
a raptor with its wings spread rising toward a burning sun is embroidered
into the top of the comforter, and the blanket radiates a pleasant heat on its
own. A mural of the forgotten deity graces the wall at the foot of the bed,
the image showing a radiant bird-like being striding through a crowd of
people reaching upward. The people all have vaguely birdlike features,
including beaks and feathers. The raptor design is etched into the
ceiling above the bed, the image appearing ghostly through the
veiled canopy hanging from the four pillars supporting the bed.
A pile of wet plush pillows rots in the corner beneath a steady
leak dripping through the brick ceiling. The entire chamber
smells of mildew and rot. The bed is comfortable and soft, and
the magical blanket adjusts its temperatures to keep the sleeper
warm. A sheet fungus replaced the canopy that once hung over
the bed. The fungus waits for PCs to lie down before dropping
onto them, preferably as they sleep alone.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Silid
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d6)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Blur, -1 to hit in sunlight
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A silid is a small, 3- to 4-foot tall humanoid with pale gray, leathery
skin. Though slightly thick in stature, a silid is quick on its feet and
extremely graceful. Its hair is always unkempt, short, and jagged, and
its ears are slightly pointed. Its eyes are slightly bulbous with red pupils.
A silid's arms are long and slender and end in four-fingered hands. They
attack at -1 in full sunlight. Once per day, a silid can create an effect that
blurs their image, causing opponents to miss 20% of the time.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sounds in the Dark
A baby's cry shatters the stillness of the underground. The wailing
echoes off the rock walls. The Dark Crawlers, a tribe of 20 vicious silids,
slink through the Maspar Caverns in search of prey. The creatures avoid
fair fights, preferring to set up ambushes. One of the silids is adept at
imitating creatures it hears. His favorites are a mewling cat, a whistling
songbird, a whinnying horse and the baby crying.
The silids hide in the darkness under black-cloth lean-tos near a 30-footdeep pit covered by the black tarps. The silid sound mimic sits on a ledge
halfway down the pit, hidden under the black cloth.
Anyone falling into the pit is attacked with spears and arrows. The silids
are cowards at heart and run from PCs who gain the upperhand.

Skeleton, Black
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d6) or 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Shriek
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A black skeleton is a 6-foot-tall skeleton with glistening, black bones,
seemingly constructed of blackened steel. Small red pinpoints of light
burn in its hollowed eye sockets. Black skeletons wear any clothes or
armor they had in life, and some still carry their gear and weapons. A
black skeleton can shriek a hellish sound that causes fear (save avoids).

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Bill Webb.

Back in Black
This dungeon chamber is 100 feet long by 40 feet wide, with a 10-footwide stone pathway running around a three-foot-deep tar pool that
dominates the room. A row of white marble blocks form a lip around the
bubbling tar. The ceiling 30 feet overhead is crisscrossed by a giant white
pentagram carved from the same white stone. Three arching bridges cross
the pool, each rising 10 feet above the sticky surface.

A skeleton holding a burning torch aloft in its bony hands stands in
the center of each bridge. The flickering flames cause shadows to dance
around the chamber. A dais sits in a recess carved into the room's far wall.
A black stone altar sits in the center of the dais. Atop it, a dagger carved
of sharpened onyx sits beside a black human skull.

The skeletons drop the torches into the tar pit if PCs enter the chamber. The
torches instantly ignite the tar into an inferno that raises the temperature
in the room to an uncomfortable level. Anyone within
5 feet of the tar pit must save or take 1d6 points of damage each round from
the blistering heat. When the blaze ignites, 6 black skeletons submerged in
the tar rise from the sticky, burning pitch. The black skeletons each carry
short swords. Their bodies burn for an hour (dealing 1d6 extra points of
damage to anyone they attack) before the pitch coating their bones is burned
away.

Skeleton, Lead
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  2 strikes (1d8)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Resistance to normal weapons (50%), immunity to
acid, cold, electricity and fire, immunity to magic
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

Lead skeletons appear simply to be skeletons coated with metal. Despite their
outward appearance, they are actually golem-like constructs and not undead.
Therefore, they cannot be turned.

Lead skeletons appear as 6-foot tall skeletons constructed of metal.  Some
have gemstones encrusted in the body and eye sockets. A lead skeleton is
expensive to create. Those who choose to create such creatures prefer the
added fear and awe the skeletons tend to receive, and have a great deal of
additional wealth and time.

Lead skeletons can be programmed to attack only certain creatures or be
programmed to accept certain passwords or types of clothing. More complex
programming tends to fail. In combat, they attack a single target until it is
dead.

Lead skeletons have no eyes. They “see” their opponents by emitting
high-frequency sounds, inaudible to all other creatures, that allow them to
ascertain objects and creatures within 90 feet. A silence spell negates this
ability and effectively blinds the lead skeleton.

A lead skeleton is immune to most spells, except magical attacks that deal
sonic damage which slow a lead skeleton (as the slow spell) for 1d4 rounds,
with no saving throw.

Construction Bones from a full humanoid skeleton are carefully sheathed in an
alloy of lead and iron and rejoined with iron or steel hinges. The total cost
of the body must be at least 2,000 gp. An elemental spirit is summoned during
the creation and bound to the body. To bind the elemental spirit, the creator
must summon and confine an elemental using a wish spell.  Assembling the body
requires a master armorer and a magic-user of at least 17th level that can
cast conjuration of elementals, geas, polymorph and wish.

Copyright Notice: Authors Patrick Lawinger and Scott Greene.

Not-So-Mini Lead
Dropping through a trapdoor you enter a long chamber decorated as
though it were a drawing room in a baronial manor. The floor is polished
blond wood and the walls are carved ebony panels depicting mermaids
and sea lions. On one wall there hangs a painting of a warlord wearing a
powdered wig and bright cuirass and holding a sword, the point resting on
the floor. The warlord wears a large, gold ring on his right pinky.
In the middle of the room there a large slab of lead, about seven feet long
and three feet wide and bearing the image of a skeleton in deep relief.

Any attempt to touch the slab of lead causes the skeleton to rise up from
it, grabbing at the person's arm and leaving a skeleton-shaped hole in the
lead. This hole reveals a lit chamber below. This lit chamber can only be
reached via a secret door in one of the wood panels. The secret door can
only be opened by sliding a sword point into a small, narrow slit in the
floor in front of it - a slit that looks like nothing more than a deep gouge in
the wood floor. Behind the secret door there is a spiral set of stone stairs,
damp with moisture.

At the bottom of the stairs there is a locked iron gate. The room beyond
is littered with bones. A stone slab against one wall contains what appears
to be a second lead skeleton (unfinished), along with a leather tome
containing instructions for building one of the constructs.

Skeleton Warrior
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  +1 long sword (1d10+2)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Fear aura, find target, +1 or better weapon to hit,
immune to clerical turning, magic resistance (60%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

The skeleton warrior is a lich-like undead that was once a powerful
fighter of at least 8th level. Legend says that the skeleton warriors were
forced into their undead state by a powerful demon prince who trapped
each of their souls in a golden circlet. A skeleton warrior's only purpose
is to search for and regain the circlet containing its soul.
A skeleton warrior appears as a lich-like creature dressed in the same
type of armor and clothes worn during life. Its clothes and armor usually
show signs of wear and age.

Skeleton warriors are shrouded in an aura of fear. Creatures with less
than 5 HD and in a 30-foot radius must succeed on a saving throw or be
affected as though by fear.

A skeleton warrior can track and find the possessor of its circlet
unerringly. Using this ability, it can also find the last person to possess
its circlet.

Credit: The Skeleton Warrior originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Nigel
Morgan.

Unrelenting

A skeleton warrior has been tracking its circlet for the better part of a
century. Originally stolen by a thief that delved deep into a dungeon, it
passed from his hands to a hoary sage in a sylvan kingdom. The sage
lived peacefully for many years, and was a mere week away from meeting
the skeleton warrior when an army from the steppe invaded the pleasant
kingdom in the woods and rode off with the circlet, many tons of gold and
silver and three princesses of the royal blood.

For a dozen years the circlet passed between the chieftains of the steppe
in the form of tribute, wedding gifts and loot, forcing the skeleton warrior
to zigzag its way across the rolling grasslands. Finally, it ended up in the
possession of the duke of a seafaring people. The duke had it added to
his crown and suffered from many years of strange visions and waking
nightmares before going mad and burning down his own palace, ending
his line.

The crown ended up in the dank dungeons beneath the haunted palace,
and would have remained there had a band of enterprising kobolds not
tunneled into the dungeons in search of loot. The crown now rests on
the head of the kobold chieftain, where it might be found by a band of
adventurers, who might discover they are a mere 1d6 days ahead of that
skeleton warrior, still seeking its circlet.

Skeleton Warrior's Circlet
The transformation into a skeleton warrior traps the character's soul
in a golden circlet. Anyone possessing one of these circlets may exude
control over the skeleton warrior (whose soul is trapped therein).

In order to establish or maintain control, the controller must be within
300 feet of the skeleton warrior and must wear the circlet on his head
and spend one full round concentrating on the skeleton warrior. If the
controller is interrupted during this time, he must succeed on a saving
throw to establish control. If the check fails, the controller can try
again. While wearing the circlet, the controller cannot wear any other
item on his head. Doing so causes the circlet to cease functioning until
the other headgear is removed. (A skeleton warrior can still detect the
location of its circlet even if the controller wears something on his
head to nullify the circlet's powers.)

While wearing the circlet and within 300 feet of the skeleton warrior,
the controller can see through the skeleton warrior's eyes and force
it to act (attack, search, and so forth). This is called “active” mode.
While the skeleton warrior is in active mode, the controller himself
cannot take any action other than minimal movement.

Alternately, the controller can place the skeleton warrior in
“passive” mode. In this mode, the skeleton warrior stands motionless
and inert. The controller cannot see through the skeleton warrior's
eyes but he himself is free to act. If the controller moves more than
300 feet away from the skeleton warrior or if the circlet is removed
from the controller's head, the skeleton warrior automatically enters
passive mode.

The controller can switch the skeleton warrior between active
and passive mode as a free action. Should the controller ever lose
the circlet (through accident, theft, or simply by discarding it), the
skeleton warrior instantly stops what it is doing and moves as quickly
as possible toward the former controller and attempts to destroy him
(or her). If a skeleton warrior ever gains control of the circlet that
contains its soul, it places the circlet on its head and “dies”, vanishing
in a flash of light. The circlet falls to the ground and crumbles to dust.

Skin Stitcher
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4) or 2 barbed chains (2d4)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: chain rake
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

This gaunt skeletal humanoid has heavily scarred flesh randomly
stitched together. Its eyes are sunken and burn with hatred. A skin stitcher
is a malevolent and violent creature that kills for food, pleasure, and the
skin of humanoids (which it keeps and collects). The skin stitcher stands
about 6 feet tall and appears as a skinless humanoid. Its natural body
appears to be bone wrapped tightly with corded muscle and covered with
a dark red-purplish slime. The skin stitcher's long, lanky arms end in
claws as do its thick, muscled legs. It carries two large chains covered
with many sharpened barbs. If a skin stitcher rolls a natural 20 with its
chain rake, it does triple damage to its opponent.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Skin Clan
A small knoll covered in the skeletal remains of countless creatures sits
at the edge of a rocky wasteland. The natural rock formation has smooth
sides. Crows and vultures fight over meaty rotting morsels. The birds
caw warning as they flee approaching wanderers. The bone field conceals
large anchor-like barbed hooks. Groups of these multi-pronged hooks lie
under the bones with only their barbed tips protruding above the cast
off bone. The hooks are painted white and difficult to detect. Ropes and
chains attached to the hooks lead up the slope to an encampment above
and are attached to large round boulders. A small clan of 12 skin stitchers
(3 noncombatants) has claimed this knoll as their permanent settlement.
Once enemies are detected among the bone field below, the skin stitchers
roll the boulders off the opposite side of the knoll. The boulders rapidly
drag the chains and ropes through the bones and over the other side.
Creatures within the bone field must save or be snagged by the grappling
hooks (2d6 points of damage).
Large tents of leather and chain make up the skin stitcher compound.
These skin stitchers use the hides of humanoids and other intelligent races
to sew tents and armor. They are hostile to most races but do trade with
orcs and goblins for metal goods and supplies.

Skulk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  Short sword (1d6)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Surprise on roll of 1-4 on 1d6
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Skulks are a race of humanoids that dwell on the fringe of other societies.
They are a parasitic race—the humanoid equivalent of rats that survive by
theft, subterfuge, and at times outright murder. Skulks are consummate
cowards, sneaking into humanoid communities under cover of darkness
and taking what they desire. They freeze to immobility and blend in with
the background if they are detected and flee at the first opportunity.
Skulks are human-sized, but are very lightly built. They have slender,
graceful arms and legs. Skulks have no hair, and their eyes are usually
pale blue or pink. The grayish skin of a skulk is leathery to the touch, but
the skulk has the natural ability to vary its skin tone to match nearly any
environment. A typical skulk stands 6 feet tall and weighs 140 pounds.
They speak their own whispered language and the common tongue.
Skulks can pass through forest and subterranean settings almost without
a trace (-20% chance for rangers to track).

Skulk Society Skulks dwell in small bands or family groups, living a nomadic
existence as they travel from place to place. They move constantly so as
not to attract undue attention from local militias. A skulk lair will usually
be located in an area that is easily concealed, such as a cave or forest.
Occasionally, skulks will sneak into a large city's sewer system and set
up a more or less permanent presence there, moving their lair from place
to place under the city.

Skulks remain hidden during daylight hours, leaving the safety of
their lair to conduct forays into the humanoid community under cover
of darkness. A favored tactic of a skulk band is to sneak into a residence
under cover of darkness and slaughter the entire family. Once that grisly
task is complete, the skulks remain to take what they will from the home
and leave the following dawn.

Skulk leaders might have the abilities of thieves or assassins of 3rd to
5th level.

Credit: The Skulk originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (© TSR/
Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Simon
Muth.

Pleasant Valley Vampire
A band of 1d6+2 skulks has recently taken to terrorizing an otherwise
pleasant valley. The men of the valley raise tall, red cattle with massive
black horns as much as 4 feet wide. The skulks have convinced the
farmers that a vampire has come to the valley by attacking the cattle in
broad daylight and stabbing at their necks with double-bladed stilettos,
filling glass bottles with the blood.
The skulks have found a hiding place in a copse of twisted pines that
grace the top of a rocky butte. The locals have always believed the butte
to be haunted, but overcoming their fear have searched it and found
nothing. They have recently begun demonstrating outside their baron's
manor, demanding something be done. The baron has sent his men out
several times in search of the beast and called on the assistance of clerics
from the next valley, but with no success.
As the peasant's grow more restless and frightened, one young man, an
errant knight, is fast becoming their spokesman and leader. Perhaps he
and the skulks are working together, or perhaps the knight is just taking
advantage of a bad situation. In either event, the tension in the local inn is
terrible and the baron is not inclined to welcome outsiders into his valley.

Skulleton
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (1d3 plus disease)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Disease, dust
Move: 6 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Skulletons are undead creatures believed to have been created by a lich or
demilich, for the creature greatly resembles the latter in that it is nothing
more than a pile of dust, a skull, and a collection of bones.  The gemstones
inset in its eye sockets and in place of its teeth are not gemstones at all,
but painted glass (worthless).

The skulleton is thought to have been created to detour would-be tomb plunders
in to thinking they had desecrated the lair of a demilich.  The bite of
a skulleton infects its victim with a fever unless they pass a saving throw.
The fever has an incubation period of 1d3 days and inflicts 1d6 points of
damage and imposes a -1 penalty to all missile attacks and armor class due to
swelling of the joints.

The skulleton can use its crumbled remains to attack any creature that comes
within 10 feet. As a standard action, it can billow forth a cloud of dust that
covers a 10-foot area in front of it. Creatures caught within the area must
succeed on a saving throw or be affected as if by a stinking cloud for
6 rounds. The dust cloud remains for 2 rounds and can be affected by wind.
A skulleton can use this ability twice per day.

Creating a Skulleton

To create a skulleton, the creator must be at least 9th level. The following
ingredients are required.
— The skull of a humanoid or monstrous humanoid.
— A few bones from a humanoid or monstrous humanoid.
— A small quantity (at least 1 pint) of earth (dirt).
Powder the bones (but not the skull) and mix with the earth or dirt in an
iron bowl. Pour the powdered mixture over the skull. Cast the following
spells in this order: cause disease, fly, stinking cloud, and animate dead.
Within 1 hour, the skulleton animates.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Like a Skeleton, But Not
In a rather dusty, apparently long unused passage in a dungeon there is
an oval door of brass inlaid with hundreds of skulls & crossbones. The
door is unlocked, but appears to be stuck. It takes a total strength of 18 to
pry the door open. This is because the door does not open into a chamber,
but rather tears open a dimensional rift. The rift opens onto a dimension
that seems to consist of an endless, black crystalline plane and a white
sky with wispy ivory clouds. The air of the dimension is breathable, but
smells of a coppery, electric tang. As people step out onto the glassy
ground of the plane, they might notice that their reflections appear to be
x-ray versions of themselves.

This dimension has but a single inhabitant, a skulleton placed here by
the archimage that wove the dimension. The strange creature sits about 1
mile away from the door in any direction atop a pile of dust. The creature's
reflection looks much the same, save for the piles of coins and jewels that
surround it. The skulleton does not initiate combat with the adventurers,
but fights to win if attacked.

The only way to reach the reflected “other side” of the plane (and the
treasure) is to die. In truth, one cannot truly die on this plane. Once dead, a
person finds themselves on a white, glassy plane with a black sky painted
with wispy gray clouds. In this flip-side to the dimension, the adventurers
appear as skeletons, their reflections as their normal selves. Here, the
skulleton is surrounded by a large horde of treasure and, unfortunately,
this skulleton is actually a demi-lich.

The treasure, should one manage to claim it, consists of 7,300 gp,
potions of healing, dragon control and clairaudience, a cursed shield -1
(attracts missiles) and the following gems: a hematite worth 300 gp, jade
carved to look like a pudgy infant, worth 400 gp, smoky quartz worth
200 gp, jasper worth 400 gp, a gold armband worth 315 gp, a brass and
turquoise buckle worth 300 gp, a wooden bust of a hideous hag worth 75
gp and a silver locket worth 90 gp.
Demilich: HD 21; AC -2 [21]; Atk 1 touch (10d6 plus paralysis); Move
Fly 60; Save 3; CL/XP 28/6800; Special: Magic jar, fear aura, cast spells
as 21st level magic-user, +2 or better weapon to hit, resistance to fire
(50%), immunity to cold and electricity, immunity to polymorph and
mind-affecting effects.

SLAAD LORDS

Also known as Chaos Lords, the Slaad Lords exist in the maelstrom of Limbo and
serve as agents of Chaos and rulers of a primordial race called the slaadi.

Slaad Lord of Entropy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16 (211 hp)
Armor Class: -8 [27]
Attack:  2 scythe attacks (6d6 or death)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Control undead, dragon mount, plane shift,
spells, +2 or better weapon to hit, magic resistance (85%),
resistance to cold and fire (50%), summon slaad, telepathy
100 ft.
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 25/5900

of Entropy (who some call Azathoth) atop a rough sphere of the worldbubbles. He casually reaches into the mass of bubbles, pulls one out, and
pierces it with his finger, creating a terrible chorus of screams as a world
pops out of existance. Surrounding the Lord of Entropy are a dozen lesser
slaadi, swimming about in the darkness as though to some unheard, alien
rhythm and croaking their approval as each world is destroyed.
Should visitors prove troublesome, and his slaadi unequal to the task of
destroying them, the Lord of Entropy calls Ryssk to his side and destroys
them himself.

The Slaad Lord of Entropy is believed by some to be the supreme ruler
of the slaadi race. He is a true agent of Chaos as can be seen in his actions
and mood. Few have witnessed his true power, and those who have never
speak of such experiences.

Although he usually appears as a black, bat-winged skeletal figure,
hushed whispers among the slaadi say this is in fact not his true form. It is
believed that his true form is that of a 15-foot tall black salad.
On the Material Plane the Lord of Entropy always rides an ancient red
dragon. He can command undead as a 16th level cleric. The Slaad Lord of
Entropy wields a +3 scythe that deals 6d6 damage unless a saving throw
is failed, in which case it causes instantaneous death. Unique extra-planar
creatures are immune to this effect. The Lord of Entropy strikes twice per
round with his scythe. His true form is of a black slaad.

The Lord of Entropy can use the following spells: Astral spell, darkness
15-ft radius, detect invisibility, detect magic, dispel magic, ESP,
invisibility, produce flame, phantasmal force, power word - blind (1/day),
power word - kill (1/day), sleep and symbol (1/day) and unholy word (1/
day).

The Slaad Lord of Entropy can enter any of the outer planes, the inner
planes, or the Material Plane. This ability transports the Slaad Lord of
Entropy and up to six other creatures, provided they all link hands.
Three times per day, the Slaad Lord of Entropy can summon three red,
blue, or green slaadi or two gray or death slaadi.

The Slaad Lord's Mount

When visiting the Material Plane, the slaad lord rides an ancient red
dragon named Ryssk.

Ryssk, Ancient Red Dragon: HD 11 (88 hp); AC 2 [17]; Atk 2 claws
(1d8) and bite (3d10); Move 9 (Fly 24); Save 4; CL/XP 13/2300; Special:
Breathes fire, speaks, can cast magic-user spells - four 1st level spells,
three 2nd level spells and two 3rd level spells.

The Heart of Darkness
At the heart of Limbo there is a place of complete and awful darkness.
Spells and magical effects of light create only a dim globe, illuminating an
area 10 feet in diameter at a maximum and the light seemingly spiraling
off at a curve into what must be the center of the globe of darkness. In
the dim light, one can see thousands of bubbles that are also traveling in
a spiral toward the center of the darkness. One can reach out and touch
these bubbles, grab them even, and should they peer into the bubble they
will see what appears to be visions of an alien world (or maybe even their
own world).
At the center of the globe of darkness there sits the form of the Lord

Credit: Ygorl, the Slaad Lord of Entropy originally appeared in the First
Edition Fiend Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Charles
Stross.

Slaad Lord of the Insane
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16 (198 hp)
Armor Class: -7 [26]
Attack:  3 pseudopods (2d8 plus 1 level)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Change shape, level drain, spells, regenerate 3 hp/
round, +2 or better weapon to hit, magic resistance (85%),
plane shift, resistance to cold and fire (50%), summon slaad,
telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15/18 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 26/5900

The Lord of Insanity looks like a dark gold amoeba with an oversized
humanoid brain floating in its center. Three long, black tentacles extend
from its body, writhing constantly. It is one of the most powerful slaad
lords in existence, and no slaadi questions his authority or rulership, even
the other slaad lords.

The Slaad Lord of the Insane is one of the few slaad lords that enjoys
traveling the planes and often enters the Material Plane disguised as a tall,
mystical warrior adorned in black plate armor. In the outer planes, he is
often encountered in his amoeba form or that of a great golden slaad. In
any form, it has the strength of a storm giant.
The Slaad Lord of the Insane generally covers an area about 5 feet wide
and feet tall, but being similar in makeup to an ooze, can flatten his form
and cover a greater area or squeeze through openings much smaller than
would normally be allowed. His tentacles are 10 feet long.

The Lord of Insanity can use the following spells: Astral spell,
charm monster, darkness 15-ft radius, detect evil, detect magic, detect
invisibility, dispel magic, ESP, fear, fireball, invisibility, locate object,
power word - any (1/day), shape change, symbol of insanity, unholy word
(1/day), wish (not self) (1/day).

The Slaad Lord of the Insane can assume the shape of a humanoid. In
humanoid form, the slaad lord cannot use its natural weapons and does not
deal level drain. He usually assumes the form of as a human male fighter
in black plate armor wielding an iron black longsword (purportedly the
legendary black sword: a +3 longsword that stuns any creature struck,
as if by the power word stun spell, for 1d10 minutes if the victim fails a
saving throw).

The Slaad Lord of the Insane can enter any of the outer planes, the inner
planes, or the Material Plane. This ability transports the slaad lord and up
to six other creatures, provided they are all touching the slaad lord.
Three times per day, the Slaad Lord of the Insane can automatically
summon three red, blue, or green slaadi or two gray or death slaadi.

Cult of Insanity
In the depths of a dungeon or the bad part of a city there is a temple.
The temple is built of reddish-gold stone. The temple is only one story
high on the exterior, but the interior has a sub-level and a deep pit. From
the outside, the temple is an exceedingly simple square building, about
40 feet wide and long and 12 feet tall. The temple has a single entrance, a
thick wooden door painted black.
The cultists of the temple worship an entity they call Istnynia. The
cult is not recognized by the authorities, but to date it has only been a
minor annoyance. The cultists wander the streets of the city-state at dusk,
blowing on ram's horns and loudly accosting pedestrians with the phrase
“Wake up, gentle dreamer and embrace insanity!”
The cultists wear yellow dhotis and black leather sandals and loincloths.
They shave their heads and carry black staves topped by a cluster of
jingling bells on leather cords. They have recently taken their cult to a
new level by kidnapping sacrificial victims to throw their incarnate god,
who has taken up residence in their pit.
Through the temple's single door, one enters a hallway that runs around
the perimeter of the building. At several points in the hallway there are
iron grates that allow folks in the crawlspace above to fire arrows or pour
acid on intruders. The crawlspace is usually empty, but there is a 1 in 6
chance of someone being up there and on guard. The crawlspace looks
over the inner sanctum of the temple. A second door on the other side of
the hallway and wizard locked by a 5th level magic-user leads into the
inner sanctum of the temple via a set of rough-cut stone steps.
The inner sanctum is about 24 feet from side to side and set 10 feet
below the floor of the hallway. In the middle of the inner sanctum there is
a pit that appears to bottomless and as black as pitch. Most of the temples
14 cultists (10 normal humans, three men-at-arms and a dual-classed 9th
level cleric/5th level magic-user called Aspeth) are usually to be found
here. In the daytime, the cultists are usually lounging about. At dusk, only
the high priest and the men-at-arms are present. At night, the men-at-arms
are either out searching for a sacrificial victim or returning with one.
The pit is inhabited by the slaad Lord of Insanity, who has chosen to
grace the Material Plane with its presence in this temple of chaos. It will
enjoy tussling with adventurers only until they appear to threaten it, at
which point it will return to Limbo and dispatch various lesser slaad to
torment and harass the adventurers until they are dead.

Credit: Ssendam, the Slaad Lord of the Insane originally appeared in the First
Edition Fiend Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Charles
Stross.

Slag Worm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 24
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 bite (4d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Deafening roar, immunity to fire, heat, swallows
whole
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 26/6,200

This massive wormlike creature of burnt iron and glistening hematite
grinds with the roar of the forge. A slag worm's fanged lamprey-like mouth
opens to reveal the molten fires burning in its gut. Slag worms average
about 40 feet long and weigh about 60,000 pounds, though specimens as
large as 100 feet or more have been rumored to exist. Its massive form
radiates abysmal heat and when the worm opens its maw, fires can be
seen burning and raging in its interior. A slag worm causes a deafening
roar as it moves that deafens creatures within 50 feet for 2d4 rounds. Any
non-magical weapon that strikes a slag worm melts into slag. A creature
striking a slag worm with a natural attack takes the same 4d6 points of
damage. If a slag hits with its bite attack, it automatically swallows its
opponent on its next turn. The worm's body generates incredible heat, so
that anyone within 10 feet takes 2d6 points of damage each round (save
for half). A swallowed creature takes 4d6 points of damage each round.
Fire heals a slag worm, and cold does one and a half damage to them.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Worm Crawls In
The Villogas Clan, a ruthless fire giant tribe from the Hollow Spire
Mountains, suffered a crushing defeat against the high walls of Holslot.
The fire giants tried to assault the structure head-on, but the catapults,
archers and heavy ballistae on the crenellated walls forced them to retreat.
They want desperately to get into the city, as the High Crown of the Flame
Giver is reportedly hidden in the city's temple. The fire giants think the
crown will lead them to great victories – if they can recover it.
The giants recruited a slag worm to their cause, and convinced the worm
to circle under the city's outer wall. The worm does as instructed, which
causes the entire wall to drop straight down in one fell swoop around the
city. The giants rush out of underground tunnels while the slag worm
rises out of the center of the city like a demonic force as the giants rush
the temple. The crown exists, but it's not the mythical relic the giants
hope it to be.

Slaughterford
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 arm blades (1d8+2)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Rend armor, magic resistance 20%
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

A slaughterford is a strong, wiry creature that looks almost inhumanly
slender and weak, with long bony arms and legs. Slaughterfords have
four arms. Its primary arms are very strong and, rather than hands, the
forearms end in long sharp blades made of an extremely hard and sharp
bony material. Their secondary arms, immediately below the first, are
much weaker and used for simple manipulation. If a slaughterford rolls
a natural 20 with its arm blade strike, it deals 3d8 points of damage. If
a slaughterford hits a single opponent with both arm blades, the victim
must save or his armor is ripped apart around him, dealing 2d8 points of
damage.

Lever Age
The underground caverns beneath the dwarven collieries of
Anvil Plunge are filled with the past greatness of the dwarves
before the Ashenchisel clan moved their extended families
aboveground. Flying buttresses of stone soar over the
grand halls and delicate spindles carved from rock
columns support cavern roofs. Inlaid blocks of stone on
the floor bear the merged forge and chisel Ashenchisel
clan symbol.
But deeper still in the silent earth, deeper even
than some of the hardiest dwarves dare to delve, lie
long-forgotten chambers carved by an unknown
hand. These precise, geometric rooms are sterile
and empty, and a harsh white glare glows from
trapezoidal lanterns sunk into the walls. In one
room, three dozen red-handled metal levers rise
out of a block of white stone similar to marble
sitting in the center of the chamber. Sitting
cross-legged atop the block is a wizened man
holding a fist-sized diamond (worth 2,000 gp).
The gem pulses with strobes of blinding white
light. The man is nearly mummified and ancient,
his wispy white hair hanging over his skeletal features. His dried fingers
are locked around the gem.
Two slaughterfords walk in unison around the block, each pulling
levers at random, intent on their duties. The creatures won’t
let anyone approach the marble block or the diamond.
If the creatures are slain, the figure seated on the
block begins aging in reverse, growing younger
by the second. The figure is Sutur Anrovat, a
12 HD lich trapped in the chamber for nearly
300 years. He rises at full power within 2d4
rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sleeping Willow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 11
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 4 slams (2d6)
Saving Throw: 4
Special: Sleep, spores, vulnerable to fire
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,300

A sleeping willow appears as a normal willow tree (and is often
mistaken for such) standing 15 or more feet tall. Its trunk is 2 feet or
more in diameter and dark brown in color. From the trunk sprout branches
that end in long drooping and graceful twigs. The sleeping willow is
crowned with leaves of green or brownish-green. A sleeping willow can
grab an opponent in its branches if it hits with two or more branches
(save avoids). A creature held in the branches is drawn closer to the trunk
and drained of its body fluids (1d4 hp of blood loss per round). A
sleeping willow can eject a cloud of yellowish pollen in a 30-foot radius
that causes creatures to fall asleep for 10 rounds (save resists). Sleeping
willows are vulnerable to fire-based spells and take one-and-a-half times
damage (no save).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Kite-Eating Tree
A thick-trunked willow tree stands among a dreary line of termiteeaten trees. Its branches rustle and shake. Grass grows in thick, verdant
clumps around the lone healthy trunk and yellow wildflowers bloom in
abundance. A shimmering stream of azure blue water flows over slick
red rocks near the tree's roots. A bright red kite hangs from the willow's
branches, the tail of the child's toy entwined in the leaves. The canvas
rustles and shakes.
The tree is a sleeping willow growing in the willow orchard. The kite
is left from its last meal. Hidden in the tree's upper branches are three
skeletons. The victims were strangled and absorbed by the deadly tree.
One wears yellowed plate mail armor with a jagged slash cut across the
chest. The knight's +1 long sword is wedged into a branch in the treetop.

Slime Crawler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Tentacles (1d3) and bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Constrict, slippery
Move: 9/6 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Slime crawlers are the immature version of the carrion moth (see entry
in this book). The process of maturity usually takes two to three weeks, at
which time the slime crawler feeds on any living organisms encountered.
More slug-like at this larval stage, the slime crawler's legs appear as small
buds or stumps. These legs allow the slime crawler to climb walls and
other surfaces, albeit slower than an adult carrion crawler. Four tentacles
sprout below its throat, eventually splitting (losing their grappling ability)
and growing into the pseudopod-like tentacles of the carrion crawler. A
typical slime crawler is about 6 feet long and weighs about 300 pounds.
A slime crawler attacks with its tentacles, attempting to grab an
opponent and squeeze it for 1d3 damage per round. Slime crawlers have
a nasty bite, but prefer to use their tentacles in battle.
A slime crawler exudes a thin, oily film from its mouth that leaves a sluglike trail behind it as its moves. A creature stepping in a space covered
with this slime must succeed on a saving throw or slip and fall prone.
The slime remains in the area for 1d2 hours before losing its slipperiness.
Because of its slippery secretions, a slime crawler is very difficult to
grab or hold. Attacks intended to grab or hold a slime crawler are made
at a -4 penalty.

Copyright Notice: Authors Casey Christofferson, Scott Greene, and Greg A.
Vaughan.

Slime Pit
You enter a level of the dungeon with broad (10-foot wide) passages
and generously proportioned chambers. All have peaked ceilings that are
12 feet tall at the highest point. Set into the ceilings of the passages are
glowing green orbs that cast a bright, verdant light on the passages and
allow a variety of exotic plants to grow. Set in the center of each passage
there is a bronze statue of a fertility goddess covered in verdigris. These
statues are actually automatons programmed to care for the plants. The
automatons hold objects akin to holy water sprinklers (they are actually
part of the automaton). Once per day, an enchanted pebble inside the
hollow automatons casts a create water spell.
The chambers one can access from the passages are decorated with
mosaics depicting lush gardens inhabited by sprites, satyrs, nymphs
and dryads. Lurking in one of these chambers in what appears to be a
gladiatorial pit is a brood of 1d6+5 slime crawlers, recently hatched
from large, russet eggs that were stuck to one of the walls of the pit.
The slime crawlers have begun to make forays out of the pit to search
for food, bringing it back to the pit to be devoured. The pit currently
contains a lantern (there is a treasure map in the base, which is empty) and
a backpack holding 56 gp, a smoky quartz worth 55 gp and three pounds
of chickpeas in a sealed jar (worth 9 gp).

Slime Mold
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: slam (1d8+1 + disease)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Fungal rot, immune to fire
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Slime molds appear to be an undulating mass of plant matter when
in actuality they are a rare form of non-acidic ooze. Something in the
creature's protoplasmic substance causes mushrooms, molds, mosses,
and other fungal plants to take root and grow on its surface in a symbiotic
relationship. A slime mold attacks with a pseudopod slam that causes a
creature's skin to darken as small patches of fungi and mold sprout in
random locations. Each day, the victim loses 1d6 hp until it dies
and becomes a patch of slime mold. Slime molds are immune to fire.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Home Sweet Home
A bamboo and reed hut sits amid jungle vines. The walls are slanting
outward and propped up by the trees growing around it. Mushrooms
grow along the flat roof. The interior of the shack is covered in fungi that
grow abundantly in the wet jungle. Crude furniture is nothing more than
clumps of moss and mushroom. A carpet of grasses grows across the floor
of the single-room shack. The air smells of rot.
A slime mold crawls through the grass, its body spread across the floor.
The creature is the remains of a hermit who used to live in the shack away
from civilization. Over the years, he moved less and less and eventually
became the slime that still lingers in his home.

Slithering Tracker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Strike (1d4 plus paralysis)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Engulf, paralysis, plasma drain, sealed mind,
transparent, surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 6/6 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

The slithering tracker is an amorphous and transparent creature that
inhabits dark underground areas of the world. It looks like a long, thin,
transparent protoplasm, almost snake-like in form. Unlike other oozes,
the slithering tracker does not feed on organic matter. It survives by
devouring living creatures. A typical slithering tracker is 3 feet long and
has a thickness of about 6 inches. It can grow to a length of about 8 feet.
A slithering tracker secretes an anesthetizing slime. A target hit by its
attack or that touches it with its exposed flesh must succeed on a saving
throw or be paralyzed for 1d4 hours.

A slithering tracker can engulf a paralyzed foe up to twice its own size
in place of making an attack. The slithering tracker merely has to move
over a paralyzed creature to engulf it. An engulfed opponent is subjected
to the slithering tracker's paralysis and plasma drain. A slithering tracker
only uses this ability against a paralyzed, sleeping, or otherwise helpless
opponent.

A slithering tracker drains the body fluids from an engulfed opponent.
Each 5 rounds an opponent is engulfed, it loses 1 point of constitution. A
freed victim regains points of constitution at the rate of 1 per day.
Even though a slithering tracker is intelligent, it is immune to all mindaffecting effects (charms, compulsions, illusions, and fear).

Credit: The Slithering Tracker originally appeared in the Strategic Review #5
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1975) and later in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

It Came From the Sewers
In the deeper portions of a dungeon, the adventurers come upon a sewer
system. The system consists of two levels of clay pipes built between
square chambers of cut stone with channels for the liquid waste that filters
into the system from the upper portions of the dungeon. The channels and
pipes are filled about two feet deep with the run-off. Lurking about this
sewer is a single slithering tracker that preys on the rats and insects of the
dewer and larger, more intelligent inhabitants.
The middle level of the sewers is inhabited by a small clan of sewer
dwarves, rat faced dwarves in dirty smocks and high leather boots
covered with tar to make them somewhat water-tight. The dwarves live in
chambers reachable via secret doors in the square chambers that connect
the pipes. Despite the rather horrid conditions of the sewers, the dwarves
live in relative comfort. Their natural resistance to disease helps them
survive on a diet of giant rats and other denizens of the sewer. Within
their living quarters, which all link into a central common chamber, the
dwarves are scupulously neat, burning incense to clear the air and making
as warm and comfortable an environment as they can by scavenging and
trading.
The common chamber of the dwarves is taken up by a tangle of glass
tubes, copper pipes and oddly shaped decanters. The dwarves use this still
to distill the raw sewage into pure water and a variety of other alchemical
compounds (some of the run-off comes from ancient laboratories). The
dwarves power their still with methane gas piped in from the lowest level
of sewers. They trade some of the compounds for goods they cannot
scavenge or make themselves.

Slorath
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 17
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Paralyzing gaze, spell-like abilities, magic resistance
30%, immune to cold
Move: 9/6 (burrow)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4,400

A slorath is a 40-foot-long viper with glossy-white scales and a bluishwhite underbelly. The mouth lacks the fangs of a viper and is lined with
sharpened teeth and a long, slender, icy blue flickering tongue. The eyes
are greenish-blue with vertical-slit pupils. The gaze of a slorath can
paralyze opponents (save avoids). Sloraths live in freezing climates and
are immune to cold. Three times per day, they can create a cone of cold
and ice storm. One per day it can unleash a glacial storm (similar to a
meteor swarm, but the swarm inflicts cold damage).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Winter Carnival
Kruest, a village of barbegazi in the icy north, has a terrible secret. The
homes, inns and taverns in the village are carved from sparkling ice –
some standing nearly three stories tall. Ice sculptures sit on every ice road
through the city. The Harbin House, an inn complete with ice fireplaces
has 30 rooms and an underground hot spring spa. Carved satyrs, curling
dragons, giant grinning faces and delicate carriages stand outside the
building in an ice garden. The barbegazi are expert ice sculptors.
The barbegazi struck a terrible bargain five years ago with a slorath
that threatened the town. The villagers at first sacrificed their kin – until
they realized no one would miss a few visitors who came to see the ice
sculptures. The entire village speaks of a “white dragon” outside town
that won’t leave them alone. Gullible PCs who fall for the trick are shown
a path to the slorath's lair. If adventurers don’t fall for the kill-the-dragonsave-the-town scenario, the barbegazi drug them and cart them to the
slorath's cave.

The slorath is a massive creature that has grown fat off its “deal” with
the barbegazi. It keeps its treasure frozen in the walls of its lair.

Snake, Sloth Viper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Poison
Move: 9/6/6 (climb/swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Sloth vipers are emerald colored snakes with bands of gold and black
ringing their body. Their tails are tipped with black and their eyes are
amber or brown in color. The typical sloth viper is 9-10 feet long, though
they can grow to a length of 20 or more feet. A sloth viper's bite delivers
a deadly poison.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Pit Vipers
The thick jungle canopy is alive with colorful birds that squawk and flap
off into the sky, noisy tree frogs that croak a discordant melody, and all
manner of snakes wrapping around the gnarled branches. Vines hang in
bundled clumps, and the trees present an almost impenetrable barrier. The
path through the trees is nothing more than a narrow game trail, but is still
the fastest way through the nearly impenetrable jungle.

In a wide clearing, the ground is a churned mess of swampy, thick sand
covered in a thin layer of decaying fronds and wild clumps of tangled
weeds. The jungle canopy is just 10 feet above the marshy ground,
with leafy vines dipping into the muck. The clearing is a shallow pit of
quicksand that won’t kill PCs who blunder into it (it's only three feet
deep), but does slow movement to a quarter normal.

A sloth viper lives in the tree branches over the quicksand. It uncoils to
deliver a quick venomous strike to anyone floundering in the quicksand
pit beneath it. The viper waits for creatures to die in the muck or on its
outer banks before descending to enjoy a meal.

Slug, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (2d6 plus 1d8 acid) or acid spit (4d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spit acid, resistance to sharp weapons (50%),
malleable, vulnerable to salt
Move: 9/3 (burrowing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

Giant slugs are found in moist or wet environments such as swamps,
marshes, rain forests, and dungeons. They are both scavengers and
predators feeding on both plants and animals. Giant slugs are nocturnal
creatures and spend the daylight hours away from the heat of the sun.
On extremely hot days, giant slugs bury themselves in debris where they
secrete a thick coating of mucus that covers their entire body and protects
them from the heat.
Giant slugs are larger versions of normal slugs. They are pale gray in
color with a dull white underbelly. They have a single pair of long, thin
tentacles or antennae. The giant slug uses them to sense brightness, heat,
and to smell. A typical giant slug is 20 feet long but can grow to twice
that length.
A giant slug begins combat by spitting a line of corrosive saliva at an
opponent. Every 1d4 rounds, a giant slug can spit a line of acid at an
opponent within 60 feet. A successful ranged attack that ignores armor
bonuses to AC is required to hit. If struck, a target takes 4d8 points of acid
damage. Each piece of equipment carried by the struck creature must also
pass a saving throw or be ruined.
A giant slug can squeeze its body through openings 4 feet wide or larger.
A giant slug is highly susceptible to salt and takes 1d6 points of damage
per pound of salt it contacts.

Credit: The Giant Slug originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Slow Moving Vengeance
Seeking passage to an out of way corner of the globe, the adventurers are
fortunate to find a large junk heading their way. The junk is captained by
a jovial looking giant of a man with a long, white mustache and a shaved
head that seems always to beaded with sweat. Two capuchin monkeys
decorate the man's arms and shoulders most of the time, the man absentmindedly feeding them bits of sweet potato and spicy pickles while
he barks out orders. The crew looks particularly seedy on this vessel,
probably because they are pirates. They have been hired by a magic-user
to transport a very dangerous cargo to his tower (which is conveniently
located wherever the party is heading, or close to it). The magic-user
apprentice, a comely lass with sparkling eyes and a wry wit, is aboard to
make sure everything goes as planned.
The dangerous cargo is kept in the forward hold. Naturally, approaching
the forward hold is forbidden. It is guarded by three of the pirates (one
tall, one short, one fat), who seem terribly annoyed by their duty below
decks and just itching for something to punch. Inside the hold there is a
massive construction of force that can only be the creation of a powerful
wizard. Inside the “aquarium” there is a giant slug, apparently frozen in
time.
While the captain is under the impression that he has been hired to
transport the beast to the magic-user, he is sadly mistaken. The magicuser's wife was, many years ago, lost to the depredations of the pirates.
A few days into the voyage, the aquarium simply disappears and the slug
is released from its spell to wreak havoc on the ship. The magic-user
regrets losing his apprentice this way, but there is always a price to pay
for revenge.

Soul Eater
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: -1 [20]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6 plus 1d6 wisdom)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Level drain, soul drain, only harmed by +1 or better
weapons, find target, immunities, surprise on 1-3 on 1d6 in
darkness or smoke
Move: 36 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2600

A soul eater is an extraplanar creature of great power. Its plane of origin
is unknown but is thought to be some sort of void plane. Soul eaters
are summoned to the Material Plane for one purpose—to slay living
creatures. When given a target, a soul eater can track it unerringly.
Soul eaters look like billowing clouds of inky darkness. Two long, pale
arms protrude from the darkness, each ending in a clawed hand. Soul
eaters sustain themselves on the life energies of living creatures and
derive this sustenance by draining the souls of living targets.
A creature hit by a soul eater's claw attack must succeed on a saving
throw or lose one level. When a soul eater slays a foe, it devours the
victim's soul. Such a creature cannot be returned to life by any means
save a deity's intervention.
When a soul eater is summoned to the Material Plane, it creates a
mental link between itself and the caster who summoned it. If a soul
eater's victim (i.e., the creature it is summoned to slay) is killed before
the creature can devour its soul, the soul eater returns to the caster and
attacks him. Likewise, if a soul eater is defeated in battle (but not slain)
by its target, the creature returns to the caster and attacks him. So long as
both the caster and soul eater are on the same plane of existence, the soul
eater can successfully locate the caster. If the caster leaves the plane, the
link is temporarily broken. Once the caster returns, or the soul eater enters
a plane the caster is on, the link is immediately restored.
When ordered to find a creature, a soul eater does so unerringly. The
being giving the order must have seen the creature to be found and must
know the target's name.
Soul eaters are immune to poison, sleep, paralysis, and stunning. Since
they have no clear front or back they cannot be back-stabbed.

Credit: The Soul Eater originally appeared in the First Edition module X4
Master of the Desert Nomads (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by David
Cook.

The Harpist of Souls
In a large city square a bedraggled harpist moves into the center of the
square and sits on the ground, disrupting traffic and drawing the attention
of the guards. The man has glassy eyes and a tangled mustache and beard.
His clothes are soiled and tattered. Sitting on the ground, ignoring the
shouts of townsmen and the guards, he begins to pluck his harp.
As the music winds its way through the market, people begin to
listen, intently. The crowd quiets, those few people still talking finding
themselves elbowed in the ribs or otherwise quieted. The song slowly
grows louder and the crowd begins to sway back and forth. As they do
so, a gray haze forms over the harpist. The haze spreads out over the
heads of the crowd and grows blacker and blacker until it fills the sky
over the marketplace. As the people turn their faces to the blackness, two
long, pale arms appear above the harpist's head. They appear to be very
far away, but quickly move nearer, until they reach out of the cloud and
grab one of the crowd. The person wriggles for a moment and then drops
lifeless to the ground.
As this, the harpist finishes his song and slumps over, chin on chest.
The crowd awakens from their fascination and begins to scream and flee
from the square as the arms pursue them. After thirteen people have been
killed, the blackness and the soul eater suddenly disappear. The harpist
awakes, gets to his feet groggily, and then moves on. Those attacking the
harpist discover that he is incorporeal. Should one have weapons or spells
that affect incorporeal creatures, the harpist is merely a normal human, a
minstrel who had the misfortune of trading a few gold pieces to a cloaked
stranger for the harp.

Soul Nibbler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d3)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Level drain, immune to necromancy, surprise on roll
of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 6/6 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Soul nibblers are rats that have undergone genetic mutation due to
continued feeding on essence ingots (see sidebar). The biological effects
of a prolonged consumption of soul stuff are minimal. Soul nibblers are
always black in color, and their eyes sometime glow with a sickly light.
The magical changes wrought by their unholy diet, however, are more
profound, granting the soul nibblers unique necromantic abilities.
Having begun life as normal rats, soul nibblers behave in combat much
like their mundane cousins. The primary difference between soul nibblers
and standard rats is their bond to dark magic, which grants them the
powers of level drain and necromantic immunity.

Living creatures hit by a soul nibbler's bite attack lose one level unless
they pass a saving throw.

Soul nibblers are immune to a cleric's cause wounds spells (i.e. reverse
of cure wounds) as well as spells that cause death or energy drain.

Essence Ingots Essence ingots are small rectangular bricks of blackened stone
that contain the soul of a living creature. Creatures are trapped in
essence ingots through the use of a great smelter, the location of
which has been lost.

A trapped spirit can be released by casting remove curse (or
similar and more powerful magic). A released soul reforms its
material body in 1d4 rounds. If an essence ingot is broken, the
trapped soul is not released but is lost forever.

Credit: The soul nibbler first appeared in module G3 What Evil Lurks by Lance
Hawvermale (© Necromancer Games, Inc., 2002).

Copyright Notice: Authors Travis Hawvermale and Scott Greene.

Eternal Scholars of Darkness and Deceit
In a dingy flat overlooking a narrow alley three young scholars have
gathered to perform a magic ritual - a real one. One of three, who have
dubbed themselves the Eternal Scholars of Darkness and Deceit, procured
a scroll from his master at the university while said master was in his
cups. The scroll contains the true name of a devil (an erinyes, it turns out)
and the summoning ritual to bring it into the Material Plane and bind it.
The scroll case that contained the scroll also contains a number of small,
black metallic pellets.

As adventurers walk through the alley, perhaps on their way to the
Carmine Unicorn to buy a few pints, they see crimson smoke, pungent
and choking, pouring from the windows and filling the alley. Following
closely behind the crimson smoke is a swarm of 1d10+10 soul nibblers,
rats fed the pellets as proscribed by the ritual.

Once the soul nibblers appear, the erinyes is only 6 rounds behind. The
ritual has a 50% chance of success. If successful, the erinyes is bound to
serve the ambitious young scholars. If not, it kills them and then turns its
attention to conquering its new home.

Erinyes: HD 9; AC -2 [21]; Atk Longsword (1d8+1) or longbow
(1d8 + 1d6 fire) or rope (entanglement); Move 12 (Fly 24);
Save 7; CL/XP 17/3500; Special: +1 or better weapon to
hit, immunity to fire and poison, resistance to acid and
cold (50%), magic resistance (50%), telepathy 100 ft., see
invisibility, immune to illusions. Erinyes can cast the following
spells: Charm monster, teleport, phantasmal force.

Soul Reaper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18
Armor Class: -3 [22]
Attacks: 1 scythe (2d4 + soul slash)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: +2 or better magic weapons to hit, magic
resistance (60%), soul slash
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4,400

Soul reapers are 12-foot-tall undead creatures shrouded in long, black
hooded cloaks. No discernible facial features are visible under the hood.
The creature's hands end in wicked claws of inky blackness that are
always clutched tightly around its gleaming, sharp scythe. If a soul reaper
hits with its scythe, an opponent must save or have its soul torn from
its body and pulled into the reaper's scythe. The victim's soulless body
collapses into a desiccated husk and crumbles to dust within 24 hours. To
reclaim a soul, the reaper must be destroyed and its scythe shattered on
holy ground. All souls trapped within are released and seek their original
body (if it's been less than 24 hours since it was killed). Creatures without
a body are left to wander in spirit form, although a wish or resurrection
can restore them. Soul reapers can see invisible creatures, and can cast
confusion and symbol of pain once per day.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Fear the Reaper
An ornate metal stand of dark wrought iron stands at the dusty
crossroads. A voluminous tome with a mahogany leather cover lies open
atop the stand. Names are scrawled across the open page, but plenty of
space remains to add more. A quill taken from the corpse of a roc slain
under a full moon sits in a vial of squid ink in a metal recess.
The Book of Possibilities is a magical volume that appears randomly
and offers potential signers a blind choice: Sign their name and receive
powerful rewards or face the consequences of their decision. Each time
someone signs his name to the book, the pages randomly flip for the next
signer. There is an even chance this new page brings wealth and power
for the PC (although it is up to the Game Referee to decide how this
occurs and when, although the wish could be twisted as per an infernal
pact). There is the same chance the PC finds himself facing a soul reaper
that forms out of the sepia ink on the stand. If a soul reaper is summoned,
the creature targets the signer until his death, then fades away until
summoned again (at full strength). The book and stand evaporate with
the coming dawn.

Spectral Troll
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  Incorporeal bite (1d8) and 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Corrupting touch, create spawn, manifestation,
rend, regeneration 2 hp/round
Move: 12/12 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

A spectral troll stands nearly twice as tall as a human. Its arms are long
and gangly and its nose is droopy and slightly oversized. Its arms end in
powerful claws. Filthy black, matted hair streams down from its head.

A spectral troll that hits a living target with its incorporeal bite or an
incorporeal claw attack deals 1d6 points of damage. Any humanoid killed
by a spectral troll rises 1d3 days later as a free-willed spectre unless a
cleric of the victim's religion blesses the corpse before such time.

A spectral troll dwells on the Ethereal Plane and, as an ethereal creature,
it cannot affect or be affected by anything in the material world. When a
spectral troll manifests, it partly enters the Material Plane and becomes
visible but incorporeal on the Material Plane. It can be harmed only by
other incorporeal creatures, magic weapons, or spells, with a 50% chance
to ignore any damage from a corporeal source. A manifested spectral troll
can pass through solid objects at will, and its own attacks pass through
armor. It always moves silently and its incorporeality helps protect it from
foes on the Material Plane, but not from foes on the Ethereal Plane.
In most cases, it's difficult to destroy a spectral troll through simple
combat: The “destroyed” spirit will often restore itself in 2d4 days. Even
the most powerful spells are usually only temporary solutions. A spectral
troll that would otherwise be destroyed returns to its old haunts with a
successful saving throw. As a rule, the only way to get rid of a spectral
troll for sure is to determine the reason for its existence and set right
whatever prevents it from resting in peace. The exact means varies with
each spirit and may require a good deal of research.

Spectral trolls vanish in direct sunlight. They are not harmed by it, nor
does it cause them any discomfort: they simply do not appear in sunlight.
Spectral trolls that are held, restrained, confined, or imprisoned vanish
in direct sunlight. Once night has fallen, a spectral troll reappears. If the
spectral troll was magically held or restrained, the magic does not resume
when it reappears.

Credit: The Spectral Troll originally appeared in the Second Edition Monstrous
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1993) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Wizards
of the Coast.

Hunter or Hunted?
The adventurers, wherever they might be, have wandered into the
territory of a spectral troll. The troll dwells on the ethereal plane in a
twilight cave on a bleak moor of reeking spirits and ghostly white willows.
The troll is always on the hunt for prey, and there is a 3 in 6 chance it will
catch the scent of the material creatures walking through its territory.
The troll is canny and cunning, and waits for one person to become
separated or for the group to slumber before striking. If the group has
men-at-arms or animals that are easier targets than the adventurers, the
troll takes them first. If the group proves clueless as to what is attacking
them in the night, it will follow them for many days, killing victims,
dragging them away and gorging itself on them before the dawn arrives
and it must return to its home plane.
On the Ethereal Plane, the troll keeps 1d6 x 100 sp and 1d4 x 1,000 gp
in its cave, along with a massive collection of knuckle bones.

Spider, Skull
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  Sting (1d8 from poison)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Poison
Move: 9/6 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Skull spiders are tarantula-like creatures that reside in the skulls of their
victims. The two front legs of a skull spider contain poisoned barbs that
they use to sting their victims. The weak and fleshy body of a skull spider
is about the size of a grapefruit and is easily damaged. Its eyes grow on
the end of long, slender stalks. Skull spiders take up residence within
skulls as a means of protecting themselves in a manner similar to hermit
crabs.
Their eyestalks protrude through the empty eye sockets of their skull,
and their legs have a backwards curve in the first joint that enables them
to extend out of the bottom of the skull to allow rapid locomotion. Skull
spiders can also fold their legs under their skull so they cannot be seen.
Many an adventurer has been unnerved by the sight of dozens of skulls
seemingly sprouting long, spidery legs and skittering toward them.
A colony of skull spiders is led by a king and queen, which are the only
two members of the colony that are capable of reproducing. After a victim
is subdued, the queen deposits an egg in the skull. Queen skull spiders
are always 3 HD. The larva hatches, consumes the brain over a period
of weeks, and then enters a pupae stage. After several months, when the
corpse is sufficiently deteriorated, the new skull spider hatches, uses its
strong legs to detach the skull, and goes to join its colony.
A skull spider delivers a virulent poison with a successful bite attack. A
successful saving throw cuts the poison damage in half. Every 10 rounds
after suffering poison damage, a victim takes an additional 1d4 points of
damage until they pass a saving throw by 3 points or receive a neutralize
poison spell.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Chamber of Skulls
The catacombs (beneath the city streets or on some level of a dungeon)
are lined with hundreds of grinning skulls. The skulls are set in long
compartments set in the glistening walls (they contain copious amounts
of iron pyrite) at eye level. Hidden among these skulls is a swarm of
1d10+10 skull spiders. As people enter the catacombs, the spiders begin
tracking them, waiting until they reach an octagon shrine in the middle
of the catacombs. The shrine is set a few feet below the level of the
catacombs and is 10 feet wide in each direction and 10 feet tall from floor
to ceiling. Four of the walls of the shrine open into other corridors, while
the other four contain totem-like statues of stacked, toad-faced demons.
The top of the totem has a wide, gaping mouth that begins releasing
a cloud of sleeping gas as soon as a pressure plate in the center of the
chamber is activated. The sleeping gas fills the top foot of the chamber in
the first round, and another foot with each additional round until the upper
six feet of the chamber is fairly inundated with the gas. Anyone in the gas
cloud must pass a saving throw each round (at a cumulative -1 penalty per
round) to avoid falling asleep (per the sleep spell).

Spider Collective
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Engulf, swarming body, poison
Move: 6/12 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A spider collective is a human-size spider composed of thousands of
smaller spider swarming into the familiar shape. A spider collective can
sling individuals spiders from its body at a single target within 10 feet to
deal 1d6 points of damage. Any creature attacking a collective creature
unarmed or with natural attacks automatically takes 1d4 points of damage
as the smaller spiders swarm over the attacker. At will, a collective spider
can break into smaller swarms or even into individual creatures and
disperse. Other collective creatures such as collective fire ants, wasps and
leeches are rumored to exist. A spider collective's poison is derived from
the thousands of spiders in the group, and deals 3d6 points of damage
(save for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Cluster Yuck
Plaques and display cases holding the pinned remains of thousands of
insect specimens line the wall of this chamber. Short bookshelves contain
volumes on arthropods and insect diagrams. Dissection drawings and
notes relating to spiders lie on a podium. Strapped to a wide metal table
is the body of a large spider-human hybrid. Its split abdomen contains
rotting internal organs. A mechanical device incorporating vials of green
liquid sits partially sewn into the chest cavity. Oozing bile and pus drip
from the table to the floor. The creature – whatever it was – is dead and
poses no threat.
The shadowy ceiling is covered in a thick layer of normal black spiders.
The height of the room and light sources make the spiders difficult to
discern. The spiders drop from the ceiling in a huge teardrop shape and
form a collective spider to defend their master's laboratory.

Leech, Spinal
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
These vermin appear as 3-inch long transparent leeches. A typical
encounter is with a swarm of 10-20 leeches. They are found in swamps,
marshes, and stagnant underground pools. They attach to their prey
and drain spinal fluid, thereby inducing paralysis in the victim. When
encountered, the spinal leeches crawl onto their victim (1 in 6 chance of
noticing), moving quickly to its spine. A spinal leech needs only a single
round to reach its destination. If the target is wearing chainmail armor, an
additional round is added to the time as the leech finds a way underneath
its host's armor; 2 rounds are added if the victim is wearing platemail.
When a leech attaches itself, the victim has a 1 in 6 chance of feeling
a strange sensation run down his spine; otherwise, the spinal leech's bite
goes unnoticed. Each round thereafter, a saving throw must be made or
the victim takes 1d6 points of dexterity damage. At dexterity 0, the victim
is paralyzed until his dexterity score is brought to 1.
An application of fire or salt instantly kills all leeches. They can also be
pulled from a host with no ill effects.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Who's Watching Your Back?
You enter a long tunnel that curves downward. The tunnel was dug by
a purple worm. Where the tunnel dips, there are pools of stagnant water
inhabited by swarms of 1d10+10 spinal leeches and the remains of some
of their victims - mostly giant rats, but also a bugbear and two dwarves.
The bugbear is dressed in piecemeal armor and carries a spear, while the
dwarves are dressed in dark gray buckskin and carry backpacks, daggers
and 1d6+10 gold pieces and a few other adventuring supplies. The tunnel
runs about two miles, and intersects with other similar tunnels cut by
purple worms, as well as natural caverns. The tunnels would make a fine
underground highway were it not for the spinal leeches.

Spriggan
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Short sword (1d6) or pole arm (1d8)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Spells, size alteration
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Spriggans are among the ugliest and certainly the most foul tempered
of all gnomes. At one moment a normal-sized gnome, a spriggan can
grow to giant-sized in an instant, gaining immense strength and taking
unsuspecting opponents by surprise.

Spriggans are, by human standards, quite homely. They have stocky
bodies and sickly ochre-colored skin and dark hair of brown of black.
Male spriggans favor facial hair such as shaggy mustaches and ratty
beards, but any head or facial hair they have is unkempt and filthy. Female
spriggans do not have facial hair. Being unhygienic creatures, spriggans
never bathe or clean their clothing or equipment. Thanks to their filthy
lifestyle, spriggans reek with the foulness of dirt, body odor, and other
unpleasantness. Despite being gnomes themselves, spriggans despise all
of their gnomish kinfolk.

A typical spriggan stands 3-1/2 feet tall and weighs 50 to 55 pounds.
An enlarged spriggan stands about 8-1/2 feet tall and weighs 500 to 550
pounds. Spriggans speak the language of gnomes with a thick accent and
they trill their “r”'s. Some speak the common tongue as well.
Spriggans can cast fear, pyrotechnics and strength at will. They cannot
use these abilities when they are enlarged.

At will, a spriggan can enlarge to triple its normal size and ten times
its normal weight. Weapons, armor, and other inanimate objects on its
person grow proportionately with it when it changes size. The spriggan
can changes sizes at will in place of making a move in comat. An enlarged
spriggan doubles its Hit Dice and doubles its damage. While enlarged, a
spriggan cannot use its spells.

Spriggan Society Spriggan mobs are almost always comprised of males; female spriggans
rarely venture out of their dismal lairs other than to gather food. Mobs
of spriggan males are nomadic in nature, roving from place to place and
never settling down for more than a few days unless there is promising a
opportunity for rewarding raids on local communities. Female spriggan
mobs are unusually stable for such chaotic creatures, often lairing in the
same place for years before moving on. Spriggan leaders are 7 to 9 hit
dice.

Credit: The Spriggan originally appeared in Dragon #59 (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1982) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/ Wizards
of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on original
material by Roger Moore and Gary Gygax.

Down and Out Gnomes
A mob of 1d10+2 spriggans has established a lair in the broken remains
of a caravan. The caravan, or what remains of it, consists of three wagons,
human-sized, in terrible shape. The wagons have been overturned, some
of the wood splintered, the wheels missing, etc.
The destroyers of the caravan are the same spriggan who now inhabit
it. The broken and bloodied bodies of the guards and drivers have been
stripped of their valuables and thrown into a gully about 1 mile away. The
bullocks were eaten, their charred bones cast into the surrounding woods.
The spriggans welcome outsiders, posing as down and out gnome
cobblers, the survivors of an attack who are without rations (they bury
their food) and have had little luck hunting. The spriggans allow travelers
to do a few things for them before enlarging themselves and attacking.
The gnomes have a treasure of 3,840 sp, 1,310 gp, a brass bracelet set
with an obsidian shark (worth 210 gp) and a scroll of protection from
magic wrapped in a wolf skin (worth 8 gp) and buried in the ground
twenty paces away from their camp.

Sprite
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Short sword (1d3) or shortbow (1d4)
Saving Throw: 18 (16 vs. magic)
Special: Sleep arrows, speak with animals, spells, magic
resistance 25%
Move: 12/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality (lawful tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A reclusive folk, sprites live in meadows and woodland glens, where
they have appointed themselves the monitors of their lands. They stand
about 2 feet tall and fly by means of their tiny diaphanous wings. Sprites
have very delicate features with tiny, upturned noses and large pointed
ears. Their eyes sparkle like moonlight on a forest lake, and their tiny,
high-pitched voices sound almost like music.

Sprites are very capricious creatures, even finding elves a bit stodgy and
serious; only druids have regular contact with sprites, and indeed many
druids get their training from sprites.

Sprites speak the common tongue and the language of elves, gnomes,
pixies, dryads and satyrs. They can also communicate with woodland
animals.

Sprites detest evil and attack it on sight. Opponents are knocked
unconscious with sleep arrows and then spirited away to some reclusive
locale where they are placed, without weapons or gear and left to their
own accord. Extremely evil creatures are usually slain outright by the
usually fun-loving and good-natured sprite.

Sprites coat the tips of their arrows with an ointment that causes any
creature struck (regardless of HD) to fall asleep (as the sleep spell) for
1d6 hours unless they succeed on a saving throw.
Sprites can cast detect evil (range 150 ft.), and invisibility (self only)
at will.

Sprites are one of the few races that are truly immortal, never aging.
They cannot die from natural causes. They still need to eat, sleep, and
breathe, and can be killed normally.

Sea Sprite Sea sprites are the aquatic version of normal sprites. As their name
implies, they are joyful fey who dwell in the sea. Their hair resembles
strands of seaweed and they have large, fish-like eyes. The skin of a sea
sprite is pale blue. Lacking wings, sea sprites cannot fly, but thanks to
fine webbing in their fingers and toes they can swim at a speed of 24.
The weapons and abilities of the sea sprites are identical to those of
their land-dwelling cousins, except they employ crossbows rather than
shortbows. Sea sprites can breathe both air and water without difficulty.
Like normal sprites, sea sprites make use of special ammunition that put
their opponents to sleep.

Credit: The Sprite originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Sprite: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by
Gary Gygax.  Sea Sprite: Author Scott Greene.

Faerie Fair
A tribe of 1d10 x 10 sprites is hosting a pleasant fair in the woods about
5 miles away from a large human village. Under the light of the full moon,
the market is set up between several large liveoaks with gray trunks and
broad, dark green leaves. The sprites are hawking plump golden grapes,
full pomegranates, dates, sharp bullaces, damsons, bilberries, rare pears
and greengages.
A number of strange folk are wandering through the fair, pinching
grapes, tasting sparkling wines poured from silver decanters. The fairgoers
include a band of lusty satyrs, a few quiet hamadryads poking their green
faces from the oaks, several elven merchants, abacuses in hand, clerks
scrawling notes on parchment scrolls with silver-tipped quills, a number
of young maids from the nearby village and even a few warty hobgoblins
holding baskets bulging with fairy fruit.

Squealer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (1d8) and 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Rend with claws, sound imitation, surprise on 1-2 on
1d6 in woodland environments
Move: 15/12 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

A squealer is about the size of a large gorilla. Its fur is long and
yellowish-green in alternating splotches. Its shoulders are hunched and it
has a forward-thrusting, pig-like head. Razor-sharp teeth line its mouth.
Its four forelimbs sprout from its body—two from the hunched back and
the other two from high on the hindquarters. A fifth limb grows from the
middle of its back.
Squealers are carnivorous predators found in dense forests. They are
voracious creatures and spend a good part of their day hunting food.
A typical squealer stands 9 feet tall and weighs about 400 pounds.
Squealers communicate with others of their kind using a series of grunts,
growls, and squeals. They cannot speak any known language.
A creature hit by a squealer's bite attack must pass a saving throw or be
grabbed and held tight. A held creature is rended by the squealer's claws,
suffering an automatic 2d6 points of damage.
A squealer can mimic any animal or magical beast sound it has
previously heard. Listeners who succeed on a saving throw detect the
ruse.

Credit: The Squealer originally appeared in the First Edition module S3
Expedition to the Barrier Peaks (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1980) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and
is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Lipstick Goblins and Pigs
While traveling through a forest of tremendous blue gums that rise 200
to 300 feet in height one might have the misfortune of running into a gang
of 1d3+1 squealers. The curious beasts dwell in the upper branches of
the trees, listening for out of place sounds on the ground below and then
crashing down through the foliage to subdue their prey.
Once killed or knocked senseless, a body is dragged up into the tree and
eaten. Belongings are tossed onto the floor below or become lodged in
the trees. The local goblins scavenge for these treasures in the hours just
before dawn, when the squealers are usually asleep. They stow them in
their burrow, located in a copse of lipstick trees. The goblins use the paste
made from the seeds in their cuisine (they mix them with mangoes and
onions and use it to flavor their stews) and use it as a dye to color the left
half of their faces.

Stegocentipede
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (2d6 plus poison) and tail (2d6 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 7
Special: Poison, spines
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

A stegocentipede resembles a gigantic centipede covered with chitinous
plates of hardened bone that run along its back in double rows. Its rear
portion ends in a long, scorpion-like stinger. They are greatly feared by
adventurers and other dungeon dwelling denizens for their poisonous
bite and sting. A typical stegocentipede is 18 feet long. A stegocentipede
ranges in color from brown to green.
A stegocentipede delivers a debilitating poison with its bite and
tail attacks. The poison causes the victim's joints to swell and causes
numbness in the extremities. The victim must pass a saving throw or
suffer 1d6 points of damage to their dexterity score. A dexterity 0 means
total paralysis. Lost points of dexterity return at the rate of 1 per hour.
A stegocentipede raises its spine-plates during combat, and moves
rapidly back and forth while attacking. Creatures in a space directly in
front of a stegocentipede must succeed on a saving throw or take 2d8
points of damage from the spine-plates each time they attack (whether
successful or not).

Credit: The Stegocentipede originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Mage Duel Gone Awry
While delving in a deep dungeon or visiting an important market town,
the adventurers are unlucky enough to happen upon a very unhappy
stegocentipede. If in a dungeon, the beast is in the middle of trampling a
bugbear camp in a large, smoky cavern. In a town, it will have flattened
the better part of the town center, sending hundreds of people screaming
for the town gates in a panic.
The beast was summoned by a rat-faced (literally, lab accident) magicuser to destroy his rival, a marble-skinned elf who drapes herself in silks
and satins. The two wizards have made a game out of trying to kill one
another, usually through the summoning of wondrous creatures. All the
other folk of the dungeon or area have grown unfortunately used to these
attacks, but unfortunately lack the ability to put an end to it.

Stench Kow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Gore (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Charge, trample, stench, immunity to cold, fire and
poison
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The stench kow is the cattle of the lower planes. It resembles a large
bison with a hunched back, long, downward-curving horns and grotesque
facial features. They are used as food by the denizens of the lower planes
and are often found in large herds wandering the wastelands of the nether
regions. A typical stench kow is 8 feet long and weighs about 3,000
pounds. Its fur is orange or brown in color and mottled green throughout.
A charging stench kow deals double damage with a successful gore
attack. It can move over opponents, inflicting 1d8 points of trampling
damage unless the person passes a saving throw and leaps out of the way.
A stench kow exudes a foul body odor. All living creatures (except
stench kine) within 5 feet of a stench kow must succeed on a saving throw
or be nauseated for as long as they stay in the area and for 1d4+1 rounds
after they leave.

Credit: The Stench Kow originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Hell's Stampede
A vast herd of 1d4 x 15 stench kows (plus 50% as many stench kalves
and one 6 HD strench bull per 5 females) is mulling about a copper spiral
sculpture. The sculpture puts an electric tang into the air and one will
discover a static electric aura around the device, which stands about 15
feet tall and is 5 feet in diameter. The sculpture, if that is what it really
is, is smooth to the touch and gives one an electric shock for 1d4 points
of damage.
There is a 1 in 20 chance when touched that a charge of elecricity will
surge across the landscape and into the sculpture. Besides this charge
causing a stampede of the stench kine, anyone touching the sculpture
suffers 3d6 points of damage and is vaulted across dimensions from the
Nine Hells to the Material Plane.

Stone Maiden
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 1 long sword (1d8) or 2 fists (1d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Animate rocks, +1 magic weapon needed to hit,
magical abilities
Move: 12/12 (burrow)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

Stone maidens are exquisitely carved statues, female and shapely in
design. Loose-fitting robes clothe her form and a veil hangs across her
shoulders and wraps around her head, though her face is not obscured.
Her skin is the color of shale. A typical stone maiden stands about 6
feet tall. A stone maiden can animate rock and control up to two rocks
at a time. Animated rocks are vaguely humanoid-shaped (most often
resembling a stone maiden) and use the same statistics as stone maidens.
Once per day, a stone maiden can create a wall of stone.

Made in Stone
Wide flagstone steps encircle a round altar. Four 20-foottall pillars surround the steps, each connected to the adjacent
pillar by thick iron chains suspended 10 feet above the
floor. Four bull heads made of stone crown each pillar.
Closer examination reveals that the bull heads are those
of gorgons. Between the pillars are eight kneeling stone
maidens. They have knelt in prayer for over a year and
appear to be nothing more than stone statues. Vines grow
over their bodies but do not hinder their movements. A
toothed stone chisel made of adamantine rests on
the altar. The stone maidens are the guardians of
the Chisel of Zemlya. Legends state that this
chisel and Zemlya's Hammer have the power
to slay any mortal by engraving their true
name into stone.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Stormwarden
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  Longsword (1d8) or longbow (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Conjure storm
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Stormwardens dwell high in the mountains and hills away from
civilization. They are hunters by nature and spend their time hunting and
trapping game. They are isolationists and solitary, rarely found in groups
of more than 6 individuals. Their hair color and eye color range across
the spectrum just as a normal human, though most tend to have dark hair
and eyes.

Quite intelligent, stormwardens speak their own tongue and at least two
other languages.

Once per day, a stormwarden can create an effect similar to a control
weather spell as cast by a 10th level magic-user, except that it affects an
area in a 1,000-foot-radius circle and the weather effects are immediate
rather than gradual. The effects last for 1 turn before the weather in the
area returns to normal.

Stormwardens as Characters Stormwarden characters retain the ability to control weather once per
day. Stormwardens can take levels as fighters (up to 6th level, or 7th level
with strength of 13+), druids (up to 7th level, or 8th level with wisdom
of 13+) or magic-users (up to 5th level, or 6th level with intelligence of
13+). They can also multi-class as fighter/druids (maximum 5th level/6th
level) or druid/magic-user (maximum 6th level/4th level).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Children of the Storm
A gang of 1d4+2 stormwardens dwells in the narrow valleys of a range
of tall mountains. Storm clouds often blanket the mountain tops and swift
floods pour down the mountains into the valleys below, carrying with
them gold and silver dust. The mountains are composed largely of granite
with large veins of quartz running through them.

The stormwardens live off the land, trapping animals and collecting
juniper berries and a variety of spicy wild radish that grows in the valleys.
The stormwardens are brothers, sons of the local storm god and a daughter
of a storm giant that dwells much deeper in the range of mountains. These
grandsons of the storm giant form the first line of defense of his mountain
top kingdom.

Despite their rugged ways, the brothers live in a subterranean hall with
walls of quartz and thick bearskin rugs on the floor. Their treasure consists
of 120 cp, 2,110 sp, 355 gp, a scroll with three low level spells and a rock
crystal worth 115 gp.

Strangle Weed
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Slam (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Constriction, camouflage, resistance to fire (50%),
surprise on roll of 1-4 on 1d6
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The strangle weed is a large, 12-foot wide plant that resembles a patch of
seaweed. It attacks by grappling its foe and then squeezing it or drowning
it (in the case of air-breathing creatures). Slain creatures are digested by
the strangle weed. The strangle weed is dark green and slightly slimy.
Three to ten fronds, each about 10 feet long, protrude from its main body,
though the strangle weed can easily hide them from potential prey.
A subterranean version of the strangle weed is believed to exist, though
encounters with it are very rare. It is dark blackish-green and is found in
underground pools, stagnant water, and the like.
Creatures struck by a strangle weed must pass a saving throw or be
grappled in its long fronds. Grappled creatures suffer 1d6 points of
damage automatically each round. Escape is possible with a successful
open doors check.
Druids, rangers and elves are only surprised by strangle weeds on a roll
of 1-3 on 1d6.

Credit: The Strangle Weed originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Bad Weed
Just off a stormy coast there is a small, rocky promontory. The
promontory rises about five feet above the surface of the surging surf. A
group of 1d3+1 fronds of strangle weed are rooted just beneath the waves
here, and they wait eagerly for people to be blown or knocked off the
stone and into the water.
Embedded in the rocky pillar there is a golden goblet. The rim of the
goblet sticks about three inches above the rock and cannot easily be
chipped out (most folks have a 1 in 12 chance of chipping away enough
rock to loosen the goblet without destroying it, dwarves and gnomes a 1
in 6 chance).
If the goblet is filled with wine, no matter how cheap or fortified, the
stone of the pillar begins to slough away as sea sand. After about 5
minutes, a woman with sapphire skin, long black hair and garbed in a
panther pelt is revealed. This woman is a sorceress of elder days, trapped
in the stone for millennia by a rival. The woman is an 11th level magicuser who still has most of her daily spells memorized. She is dazed when
first released, but when she regains her senses is smart enough to turn the
situation to her advantage.

Stroke Lad
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 slap (1d6 + Dexterity drain)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Magic resistance (15%), +1 magic weapon needed
to hit, spells
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Stroke lads are handsome and wicked looking young men of sleight
build with sharply pointed ears, with small goat-like horns jutting from
their broad temples. They dress in fine silk robes and ermine lined
cloaks and often bear a scepter or some other symbol of nobility.
Stroke lads exact their punishments on servants and enemies who
displease them with a touch of their long fingers, withering arms
and legs to make one lame, and permanently disfiguring faces of
those deemed more handsome than themselves. They can use
ESP at will. Once per day, stroke lads can cast confusion, dancing
lights, detect evil and dispel magic.

William the Squire
Sir Garin's manor has sat empty ever since his tragic jousting
accident. A young man has laid claim to the manor, declaring
himself to be William, the squire of Sir Garin. William the Squire, a
stroke lad, does not have a legitimate claim to the manor. He does have
forged deeds and a falsified title to back up his legitimacy. William the
Squire hosts lavish parties and has two satyrs as manservants who tend
to his needs.
The manor looks nothing like the esteemed mansion of Sir Garin. Coats
of lavender and chartreuse paint cover the white marble walls. Wine flows
through majestic fountains. Strange and obscene statues have replaced
refined artwork. Household servants employed for generations were
fired with no warning. Strapping young men and fickle girls now frolic
within the manor. Neighbors constantly complain to the city guards about
outlandish parties lasting well into the night. The helpless guards simply
do not have the authority to challenge William the Squire's inheritance.
Seliana Von Truqué, an actress paid by the neighbors, pleads with
travelers to throw William the Squire out of her uncle's manor, which she
claims should rightfully belong to her. If confronted, William the Squire
delicately removes his white gloves before slapping the offender. The
flamboyant stroke lad does not stoop to combat with barbaric adventurers,
and prefers to let his servants do his dirty work. He does not give up his
newfound home or wealth easily.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Stygian Leviathan
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 25
Armor Class: -6 [25]
Attacks: 1 bite (4d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Capsize, digestive acid, swallow whole, immune to
fire
Move: 24 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 28/6,800

The stygian leviathan is a gigantic whale, about 70 feet long. Its flesh is
dark gray or blackish-blue turning yellowish-white on its underbelly. Its
dorsal fin is sharply curved and short, mottled white or pale silver on the
edges. Its enormous mouth is lined with nearly 600 teeth of white or pale
ivory color. A stygian leviathan can use its massive bulk to capsize ships,
with ships less than 20 feet capsizing 100% of the time; 20 to 60 feet long,
75% of the time; and vessels over 60 feet 50% of the time. If a stygian
whale rolls a natural 20 on its bite attack, it swallows an opponent whole.
Inside the whale, an opponent will be drenched in acid from the whale's
stomach and the infernal seas it normally swims within. The victim takes
4d6 points of damage each round. A stygian leviathan is immune to fire.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Purgatory Falls
A horrible wound in the earth sits at the edge of the known lands. A
bottomless chasm splits the land. The chasm is a half mile long but is only
500 foot wide. Great plumes of steam rise from the depths. Visitors claim
to hear the agony of tortured souls echoing out of the depths of despair.
Nine of the world's largest rivers converge and fall into the chasm's
depths. The area is known as Purgatory Falls, where converging rivers
feed the River Styx that winds through the realms of the underworld.
A barge of iron and bone powered by two stygian leviathans floats
tethered to a rusted wharf. Great iron hooks pierce the leviathans’ skin,
permanently attaching them to the barge with massive chains. The boatman
Haros waits patiently for his next fare. Haros is the brother of Charon. He
is identical to the daemon Charon (see daemon, Charon elsewhere in
this book), except that Haros appears to be a living, compassionless man.
Haros requests only two things for safe passage to the underworld.
Haros requests the true name of each passenger and requires a small
personal token or possession (such as a locket of hair, piece of clothing,
or other personal affects) from that named being. If paid, the boatman
carries his fares safely over the edge of Purgatory Falls to their desired
destination. Those giving their true names and possessions remain on the
barge as if it were level ground, despite the trip over the falls. Travelers
giving false names or objects that don’t truly belong to them fall from the
barge as it tips over Purgatory Falls. Those falling are transported to a
random layer of Hell, possibly lost forever. The gaping rift prevents travel
out of the pit unless someone is traveling on Haros’ hellish barge.

Stymphalian Bird
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6), bite (1d8) and 2 wing slashes (1d6) or
4 feathers (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Throw feathers
Move: 15/30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Stymphalian birds are crane-like predators found in dense forests and
lowland hills. They are voracious predators that sustain themselves on
a diet of livestock, cattle, and the like. They are particularly fond of the
flesh of humans and elves, so always attack them on sight.
A stymphalian bird stands 7 feet tall and has an ibis-like body. Unlike an
ibis, however, the stymphalian bird's beak is long and straight rather than
curved. Its feathers, talons, and beak are made of bronze.
A stymphalian bird attacks from the air by loosing a volley of bronze
feathers at its opponents. This ranged attack has a range of 60 feet and all
targets must be within 30 feet of each other. The creature can launch only
twelve feathers (3 volleys) in a single day.
A stymphalian bird that rolls a natural ‘20’ on an attack with its feathers,
bite, wing-slash, or claws deals double damage.

Stork Pond
A pond of warm, but not hot, water lies in the middle of a region of
red hills covered with patches of tall, deep green grass. The pond is
surrounded by a copse of white elms with golden leaves. The elms are
inhabited by hundreds of jet black lorises (a small mammal with a sweet
face, large eyes, long fingers and a poisonous bite).
The pond is notable for two reasons. First, it is inhabited by a flock of
1d4+1 stymphalian birds. The birds feed on the lorises, silvery goldfish
that dwell in the pond and any travelers unfortunate enough to stumble
upon the pond.
The other point of interest in the pond is a crystal statue of a magic-user,
cobalt in color and pointing to the sky. At dusk, the light of the setting
sun strikes the crystal statue in such a way to cause a beam of azure light
to spring from the pointing finger of the statue at a strange angle. The
light falls on a portion of the shore that hides stone doors that lead into
a dungeon.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sudoth
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 6[13]
Attacks: 2 fist (1d6) and tail tentacles (1d8 + paralysis) or 1
weapon (1d8) and tail tentacles (1d8 + paralysis)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Paralytic enzyme
Move: 5/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Sudoth are vaguely humanoid creatures with a head that resembles a
large jellyfish. Extending down from its large head is a manlike torso and
arms that again change into a long knot of feathery writhing tentacles
which it uses as a means of propulsion beneath the waves. A small almost
unnoticeable band of eyes ring the circumference of its head. A sudoth
can survive out of the water for 7 hours outside of water. Its lower torso
is a mass of writhing and twitching tentacles. A sudoth's tail tentacles
excrete a powerful enzyme that paralyzes any creature coming into
contact with them (save resists) for 1d6 rounds. A sudoth can
survive out of the water for just a few hours. They often carry
wicked tridents or long spears.

Captain Fleck
PCs spy the salvage vessel Black Trollop adrift
in calm seas, her rigging snapped, her sails in
tatters and her crew absent. The Trollop sits
low in the water, her belly obviously full of
cargo. Sitting on deck is a 15-foot-tall glass
bowl with an open top. The bowl is filled
with sea water, and a strange man-jellyfish
creature floats inside. The creature is a
sudoth named Fleck who captains the
Trollop. At least the creature did until the
ship's most recent salvage expedition cost
the creature its crew and nearly its life.
The sudoth leads all salvage operations
by being lowered into the water and searching
sunken ships at its leisure. When he finds something, he pulls
the item to a net lowered from the Trollop and the sailors pull it
aboard. On his last dive, Fleck found a blood-red coral skull with
a fist-sized crystal skull fastened to the headband. The sudoth didn’t
realize the crown was a relic of Orcus that drained the Trollop's crew of
life as soon as it was brought aboard.
Fleck made it back aboard and into his command jar on deck just before
the curse turned his men into zombies. The Black Trollop is now out of
control, with Captain Fleck unable to do anything. The 15 zombie sailors
are in the Trollop's hold. Fleck promises PCs their choice of items from
his last salvage operation if they help him right his ship – and rid it of his
zombie crew. He also requires that they cast the coral skull of Orcus back
into the briny depths where it belongs.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Adamantine Wasp Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 0[19]
Attacks: stings (3d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: poison, magic resistance (12%)
Move: 5/14 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3,200

An adamantine wasp is 1 foot long and looks like its namesake only made out of
metal. Its body is segmented like a normal wasp (head, thorax, and abdomen)
and has carefully and delicately been fitted together to form the wasp.
A wicked-looking adamantine stinger protrudes from its abdomen. Its wings are
formed of paper-thin adamantine, specially treated during the construction
process. An adamantine wasp swarm delivers a debilitating poison that causes
a victim to harden into ice (save resists), causing 1d6 points of damage each
round until the creature dies and shatters.

Behind the Red Door A stone clock tower more than 100 feet tall stands
majestically in of the Tangletorn Thicket.  A low rock wall with a decorative
gate surrounds the single tower. A tidy flower garden lies in the courtyard.
Riveted metallic statues of satyr, centaurs and giant insects adorn the
garden. The statues appear mechanical but are not animated.

The windowless tower has one entrance: a pair of red steel doors. Anyone
inspecting the doors sees a complex jigsaw pattern on the red doors. The doors
are actually a swarm of adamantine wasps intricately locked together to fill
the doorway. The doors appear solid but quickly disengage to attack uninvited
guest.  Behind the adamantine wasp swarm stands an iron portcullis barring
entrance into the tower.

Sceliphron, a reclusive magic-user who specializes in clockwork creatures,
resides in the tower. He disdains intrusions and travels often on mechanical
giant dragon fly.  A clockwork dryad who serves acts as a servant and trusted
companion always remains in the tower. The elderly Sceliphron currently is
seeking to transfer his soul into a mechanical body in a bid for immortality.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Grig Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: Swarm (2d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Spell-like abilities, fiddle
Move: 6/9 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A grig swarm is a large mass of flying grigs. The individual grigs
that make up the swarm have light blue skin, forest-green hair,
and brown hairy legs, and usually wear tunics or brightly colored
vests with buttons made from tiny gems. A grig stands 1-1/2
feet tall and weighs about 1 pound. They attack with weapons,
or use their fiddles or to cause a victim to dance uncontrollably
(save avoids). Once per day, a grig can cast polymorph self, plant
growth, invisibility and pyrotechnics.

The Minstrel's Minions
A creaking covered wagon painted in bright colors and veiled in
layers of silk curtains sits at the side of the road. A dappled mare
grazes freely on the roadside.
Sitting cross-legged atop the wagon is a diminutive man, his
head covered in a wide-brimmed green hat. His whiskers are long
and his crinkled skin is covered in thick age lines. His eyes are
alive, though, and his mouth tilts up in a sly grin. He holds a wellmaintained violin in his long fingers.
Tomasi Vitali tips his hat and stands when PCs approach. The
minstrel smiles disarmingly and begins playing a light, cheery jig
on his violin. When he stops, he throws his hat to the ground and
demands payment for his music. Tomasi is a brigand, although he
doesn’t consider it theft since he entertains his victims first with
his delightful music.
If threatened, Tomasi plays a discordant jangle of notes on
his violin and a grig swarm rises out of the covered wagon.
Tomasi charmed a get-together of grig tribes with his music, and
the miniature musicians claimed his wagon to remain near the
musician. Tomasi makes the best of it, and uses the grig in his
schemes to steal from travelers.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Heat Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 2[17]
Attacks: engulf (3d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: heat, immunity to fire
Move: 12/14 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2,00

A heat swarm is a mass of flying, aggressive, foultempered elementals that resemble a thumb-sized ball
of fire with vaguely discernable facial features. A heat
swarm engulfs its foe, dealing 3d6 points of damage.
Those hit by a heat swarm must save or catch on fire.
Anyone within 20 feet of a heat swarm must save
or take 1d6 points of damage from the extreme
heat radiating off the elemental.

Point and Shoot

A 15-foot-long brass instrument similar to a
baritone horn lies on its side in this chamber. The
horn is mounted on a wooden trolley with fixed
steel wheels. Ropes beneath the massive golden
bell allow the trolley to be pulled. An assortment
of pipes and fluttering billows are mounted to the
trolley near the middle of the horn. There is no
mouthpiece to blow, as the stem is twisted into the
odd machine. A red lever on the control panel is in
the up position.

Near the lever is a crude note with words written
in block letters that read: “Aim. Pull. Stand back.”
Following the instructions causes the bellows to pump
and inflate, and 1d4 rounds later a mournful blat sounds.
Gouts of fire erupt from the horn's bell, and a reddish
mist filled with tiny skull-like faces floats out to engulf the
horn and control panel. The heat swarm rapidly spreads to
attack creatures within 50 feet. The lever cannot be raised, and
automatically rises to the up position in 10 rounds. The heat swarm
is sucked back into the bell as the instrument of death resets itself.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Landwalker Piranha Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: swarm (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Amphibious
Move: 24 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Piranhas are small, 8- to 12-inch-long black or silvery-black fish with
large bulging eyes and a tiny mouth lined with razor-sharp teeth. They
are generally black or silver with a red underbelly or mottled red spots on
their scales. Eye color is usually gray or silver. Piranhas attack using their
razor sharp teeth, biting and gnashing their prey. Once blood is spilt, the
piranha swarm enters a killing frenzy.

Angry, Gnashing Teeth
A dilapidated shack stands in a clearing in the middle of the Seething
Jungle, its windows boarded up against the elements. The flat roof is
covered in layers of giant palm fronds to keep the water out, and the entire
building is raised four feet off the ground to keep the river from flooding
in when it overflows its nearby banks. The slat door of the shack stands
slightly open, pulled off its hinges.
Banyan trees grow in thick, twisted groves to the north of the shack,
while the southern edge of the clearing ends in the river flowing through
the dense foliage. A covered still sits in the middle of the clearing, a firepit
beneath it containing week-old ash. The clearing is sliced by hundreds of
shallow grooves in the dirt that lead from the river to the shack.
The interior of the shack is covered in streaks of dried blood that paint
long smears on the walls and floor. Two skeletons wearing torn and ragged
clothing lie curled on the floor, their bones nipped and gnawed. The bones
gleam whitely. The sound of clacking bones can be heard clearly within
the shack.

Hidden under the raised floor is a swarm of landwalker piranhas taking
refuge in the cool, dank environment. The swarm hunts at night,
but won’t pass up a free meal walking into its nest. The
swarm boils out of rat holes and openings in the floor
in 1d4 rounds. The piranhas gnash their sharp teeth
constantly, creating a buzzing drone.

Wrong Step
The warm river steams in the Seething Jungle's humidity.
Heavy vines hang from branching rubber trees, and thick
foliage traps the heat. The river is a narrow ribbon
as it races through the jungle in a turbulent rush.
The far bank is a mere 20 feet away.
Looks are deceiving, however, as the river
actually undercuts the land by about 10
feet on either side. A swarm of piranha
lives in the shadows beneath the carvedout bank, where the rushing waters
can’t push them madly downriver.
Anyone venturing within 10 feet of
the water's edge has a 2 in 6 chance
of stepping through the thin soil and
into the water below. The piranhas
mercilessly strip to the bone any
creature that falls through the dirt bank
into their midst.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Poisonous Frog Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: Swarm (1d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Poison
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Poisonous frog swarms are composed of small, fierce, poisonous frogs.
A single poisonous frog is a small dark green frog with black bands or
stripes on its hind legs. These stripes function as a warning to predators
that the frog is poisonous. The skin of a poisonous frog is very smooth to
the touch. The middle digit on each of its extremities is slightly shorter
than the others. A poisonous frog swarm delivers its poison with a
successful swarm attack.

Raining Frogs
The fronds of the banyan trees dip low with water as the jungle downpour
continues. The nearby river swells over its banks as the torrential rainfall
pounds the earth. Rivulets flow along the ground, and water drops heavily
out of the trees. Storm clouds on the horizon promise the rain may
continue for days.
A colony of poisonous tree frogs nest in the upper
branches of the banyans. The rain washes out the colony's
home, dropping the frogs through the branches to the
river and ground. The frogs – already angered by the
heavy rains – swarm anything they land on.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Raven Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: Swarm (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Eye-rake
Move: 3/18 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A raven swarm is a disorienting mass of angry birds that pecks, scratches and
claws an opponent. They specifically target the heads and eyes of victims.

Come for the Wedding, Stay for the Food.
This encounter takes place as a wedding is letting out of a city temple.
PCs may be in the crowd, members of the bridal party or simply passing
by. As the bride and groom descend wide stone steps outside the church,
the guests toss handfuls of rice, birdseed and small grains over the happy
couple to wish them a fertile life together. The crowd is festive and
raucous, celebrating the happy couple.

A passing swarm of starving ravens sweep down in a flock of black
feathers and cawing voices to peck and claw at the bride and groom and
any guests covered in the birdseed. The ravens don’t hesitate to go for
the “fleshy bits” of the people in the crowd, starting with the eyes, lips
and ears. PCs may have their hands full trying to save people and shoo
the birds away.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.


Undead Raven Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: Swarm (3d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Disease, eye-rake
Move: 3/18 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

An undead raven swarm is a teeming mass of sinister, rotting, diseaseridden
birds that seek to destroy any living creature encountered. A single undead
raven appears as a rotting and diseased black bird whose feathers are torn,
matted and dirty. Its eyes are inky black. The beaks and claws of an undead
raven can spread disease.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Blood Mashes
The ground seems to bleed in the marsh fields. The ground seeps blood
from a cursed war that took place eons ago. Ghosts and spirits haunt the
bloody fields, each forever seeking an end to their cursed existence. Fresh
corpses and ancient relics of battle churn up through the soft earth, only
to be slowly swallowed again.

Ravens that drink from the bloody marsh die and sink into its depths.
By midnight, these unfortunate birds rise again as an undead raven swarm
that flies off into the night to wreak havoc. An undead raven swarm
always circles above the bloody field, sometimes landing in the nearby
dead trees.

An executioner's axe juts from a snag rising from the field. The axe was
used to slay the survivors of the battle. The snag bleeds into the marsh
field. If the axe is reached and buried within the Blood Marsh, the curse
breaks and the land no longer bleeds. Once broken, all undead within the
area are freed of their bindings.

Scarlet Spider Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Swarm (1d6 plus disease plus painful bite)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Swarm, distraction, painful bite, surprise on roll of
1-3 on 1d6
Move: 6/6 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Scarlet spiders dwell in temperate forests and make their homes in the hollows
of trees, under fall trees, and in dense foliage. They are deadly, aggressive
black spiders about 3 inches long. Their legs are long, thin, and covered in
a thin layer of dark hair. Their bodies are solid black with horizontal bands
of scarlet ringing them. Scarlet spiders are not webspinning spiders;
therefore, they do not possess the standard web ability of other spiders.

Scarlet spiders swarm over their prey, literally moving over them. Any
creature caught in a swarm suffers numerous bites. Swarms can only be
harmed with bludgeoning or area attacks.

The bite of a scarlet spider is extremely painful. A creature bitten takes
a -1 penalty on attack rolls, weapon damage rolls and saving throws until
cured by a neutralize poison or cure disease spell.

A scarlet spider carries disease and attempts to infect any creature it
bites. The disease is called the red ache. It has an incubation period of
1d3 days. Each day after the incubation period, the victim must pass a
saving throw or lose 1d6 points of strength, dying if their strength score
reaches 0. If a victim passes a saving throw two days in a row, they throw
off the disease.

Scarlet Scourge
In the middle of a tangled jungle there is a stone shaft descending
into the earth. The shaft is about 8 feet wide and high and descends at
a 45-degree slant. Hundreds of stone hands reach out from the floor and
ceilings; the hands are not animated, nor will they attempt to grab people
as they walk through.

The shaft runs for 100 feet and then ends in a pool of brackish water that
gives off a sickening sweet odor. about the time the adventurers reach
the bottom of the shaft, a colony of 1d6+4 scarlet spider swarms begins
creeping down the shaft.

There is no apparent exit from the shaft, but should one grasp the stone
hand nearest the water, a stone face emerges from the wall and says, in a
gravely voice, “Your salvation lies in the water”. At this, a secret passage
will open beneath the water, dropping the water and anyone standing in it
down a 10 foot deep shaft. The secret door remains open for 3 rounds and
then closes. What lies beyond the shaft is up to you!

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Shadow Rat Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 6[13]
Attacks: bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: envelop, immunity to fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Shadow rats are undead rats that can assume an incorporeal form. Other than
their semi-translucent form, they resemble their earthly counterparts in all
respects. A shadow rat swarm is simply a massive number of shadow rats that
have cluttered or banded together for survival or food.

A shadow rat swarm attempts to surround and envelop its opponent in its form.
A shadow rat swarm deals 2d6 points of damage.

The Died Piper

The faint fluttering trill of a flute rises in the dungeon hallway, the sound
coming from everywhere – and nowhere – at once. Moments later, a ghostly
figure steps through the wall. He is gaunt and pale, and black hair hangs
limply down around his narrow face. His legs are long and he wears high black
boots.

His ghostly torso is covered by a blood-stained shirt, and his cloak is ripped
and flutters around his body. The Died Piper does a capering jig and blows
a sorrowful tune on his flute. He then vanishes through the wall, the flute
music trailing off until it stops.  Within 1d4 rounds, a shadow rat swarm
answers the summons, boiling out of the walls to find the piper. They attack
any creatures they see for 1d6+1 rounds before moving on in their never-ending
quest.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Velvet Ant Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: swarm (1d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Poison
Move: 6/4 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Velvet ants are not really ants at all but a form of wasp.

Velvet ants have a bright red abdomen and thorax and a black head and black
legs. Its thorax and abdomen are covered with short, coarse, red hairs.
Typical adults reach a length of 1 inch. A swarm of velvet ants delivers
a large amount of toxic venom to a victim.

The Hornet Swarmed
A giant hornet – 9 feet from head to stinger – flies
through the fir trees at head height. The insect's flight
is erratic, zigging left to right and rising and falling in
the air, as if the creature were in a drunken stupor. It
slams heavily tree branches, recovers before it slaps
the ground, then resumes its dodgy flight. The giant
insect finally crashes down in front of PCs, its wings
twitching feebly. The giant hornet flew through a velvet
ant swarm and the smaller insects are eating the hornet
from the inside out. Anyone approaching the dying
hornet stirs up a cloud of velvet ants, which viciously
attack everything around their new “nest.” If left alone,
the velvet ants form a new colony nest in the ground
around the dead hornet's husk.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Warden Jack Swarm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: swarm (1d6 + trip)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Trip
Move: 4
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Warden jacks are miniscule metal objects in the shape of a ball covered
in sharp spikes. These things are able to move on their own by retracting
their spikes, and rolling along the ground. Warden jacks typically range
from 1-3 inches in diameter. Warden jack swarms have two modes of
attack: as moving caltrops, or as rolling marbles. If an opponent tries to
walk through a field of warden jacks, he must make a save or trip on the
moving spheres and fall for 1d6 points of damage.

Toy Story
The castle playroom sits empty, dust covering toys sitting on shelves and
in toy boxes. Dolls sit on shelves, their hollow glass eyes following PCs
entering the room. Stuffed wooden horses stand beside carved knights.
A toy drum is propped against the wall. A plush 6-foot-long green and
purple stuffed snake doll sits on the floor facing the door. A long-faced
marionette dangles from a hook in the wall.

The toys begin moving if PCs enter the playroom. The drum begins
thumping a random beat, the snake twists on the wood floor. The stuffed
horses fall over and the dolls vibrate on their wooden shelves. Within
1d4 rounds, a swarm of warden jacks erupt from the playthings, bursting
through the toys to roll around the room after PCs. The warden jacks were
sewn into the toys to protect the royal children.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Symbiotic Jelly
The symbiotic jelly is a small, sickly yellow blob of slimy ooze about 3
inches in diameter. It is found in subterranean realms, caverns, and damp,
dark caves. The symbiotic jelly possesses several mental abilities that it
uses to assail its foes.
When a living creature moves within 30 feet, the jelly attempts to
charm it (as if by the charm monster spell). The victim must succeed
on a saving throw to resist the effects. If successful, the victim feels a
tingling sensation but nothing more. The jelly then lets the creature pass
unharmed, as it can only attempt its charm ability on the same creature
once per day. If the save fails, however, the creature has fallen under the
symbiotic jelly's sway.
The jelly telepathically orders the victim to remain in its lair and attack
the next living creature that ventures into the area. The jelly uses its innate
illusion powers to make the host appear to be a much weaker monster or
an entirely different monster all together. It also generates an illusionary
treasure horde in which to draw potential prey into its lair. A creature can
see through either illusion by succeeding on a saving throw.
When the jelly's symbiotic link kills a trespasser, the jelly draws
sustenance as the charmed monster feeds. If the symbiotic jelly's host is
slain, it attempts to charm the creature that killed it and use it to replace
its former host. The symbiotic jelly, if it can be found, is easily killed by
an application of fire, cold, or acid.

Big Dumb Guard
You enter a stony cavern about 15 feet in diameter with a ceiling 13
feet high. Two large boulders rest in this cavern and there is a smallish
natural alcove in one wall. Perched on a ledge above the alcove there is a
symbiotic jelly. It has recently charmed a minotaur, which now guards the
ooze's lair. Piled in the alcove is a horde of (illusory) treasure.
Minotaur: HD 6+4; AC 6 [13]; Atk 1 butt (2d4), bite (1d3), weapon
(1d8); Move 12; Save 11; CL/XP 6/400; Special: Never gets lost.

Credit: The Symbiotic Jelly originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Roger
Musson.

T'shann
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 10 [9]
Attacks: 1 strike (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Alien thoughts, spew
Move: 5/5 (burrow)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

The slug-like t'shann has a cylindrical body and a mass of dripping,
writhing tentacles at its head. It is brownish gray, with patches of green
and black blotches scattered unevenly over its body. Its underside is pasty
off-white in color and ripples with the muscular contractions that move
the creature along. T'shanns burrow through earth and stone to consume
the minerals trapped in the rock. They range anywhere from 2 to 4 feet
long. The alien brainwaves of a t'shann have a bizarre effect on intelligent
creatures. Within 30 feet of a t'shann, all opponents with an Intelligence
score greater than 5 must save or be affected as if by a confusion spell. If
the opponent approaches to within 10 feet, he must succeed on another
save or suffer 1d4 points of damage for as long as he remains within 10
feet of the t'shann. A t'shann can emit a spray of powerful acids from
nearly every pore on its body, affecting any creature within 10 feet of it.
This acidic spray does 1d4 points of acid damage (save for half damage).

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Matter Over Minds
The dwarves of the underground halls of the Granite Holdfast are losing
their minds. Every day, the best and brightest – and everyone else –forget
where they are, what they are doing and even who they are. Groups roam
like zombies through the claustrophobic stone halls, their eyes and minds
clouded and confused. A few simply stop in their tracks, their minds gone
and their life soon to follow. The mineral-rich halls of the Holdfast are
rapidly emptying as dwarves wander into the deep tunnels never to return.
Sitting in the center of the dwarven stronghold is a large anvil composed
of mineral-rich rock. This 20-foot-tall stone block was said to have been
used by the dwarven gods to forge the dwarves. The dwarves found the
block during a delve and hauled it back to their throne room. The block is
infested with 6 t'shann that are slowly eating away at the stone's innards
as they eat away the minds of the dwarves.

Tabaxi
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d3) or weapon (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Pounce, track by scent, surprise on 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 15/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality (proclivity for chaos)
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

The tabaxi (called cat-people or tigerfolk by some) are a reclusive race
of feline humanoids that dwell away from settled areas, making their
home deep in the forests and jungles. They rarely engage in trade or
dealings with other races, preferring to keep to themselves most of the
time.

Tabaxis are very graceful and catlike in their movements. They
resemble humanoids with feline-like characteristics most akin to a tiger.
A typical tabaxi stands 6 feet tall and weighs about 150 pounds. They
speak their own language, and a few tabaxi understand and speak the
common tongue.

Tabaxis rely on their claws and bite in combat, though they have been
known to employ weapons (usually javelins and short swords). They
prefer to attack from ambush, using their natural coloration to their
advantage. A tabaxi that successfully strikes an opponent with both
claw attacks can make an additional rake attack that deals 1d4 points of
damage.

Tabaxis as Characters Tabaxi characters possess greater than normal speed (+3) and when
with others of their own kind or away from non-tabaxi surprise on a roll
of 1-2 on 1d6. They retain their specie's claw and bite attacks, but lose
the ability to rake with their claws. Tabaxi has darkvision to a range of 60
feet. Tabaxi can advance as fighters to 5th level (6th level with a strength
of 13 or higher) and as thieves to 7th level (8th level with a dexterity of
13 or higher).

Credit: The Tabaxi originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/ Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Lawrence
Schick.

Can You Run?
While chopping their way through a dense rainforest of durians,
tualangs, bamboo and strangler figs, adventurers might (1 in 6 chance)
come across a field of wreckage. The wreckage is composed of twisted
steel and looks something like a long tube with metal wings - it's quite
unlike anything they have ever seen (well, depending on what kind of
campaign you run).
Tracks lead from the wreckage that rangers might be able to identify as
both human and feline. The tracks lead deeper into the rainforest, finally
leaving the ground entirely and making their way into the leafy canopy.
A very skilled ranger might track the party to a tall tualang surrounded by
dozens of bunches of bamboo.
Keen eyes might see four figures suspended from a thick limb overhead
by ropes. These figures are the survivors of the wreck, three men and one
woman. All four are dressed in strange clothing and look badly beaten
up. Three tabaxi sit on the branch, guarding the prisoners while their
high priestess consults with the Great Tiger God over the correct way to
sacrifice these intruders to his divine glory.
The tabaxi dwell on several small bamboo platforms in the branches
of the tualang. There are 1d3+5 in all, including the aforementioned
guards and the high priestess. On their platforms they have tents formed
from animal skins as well as bamboo lockers to hold their kills. The high
priestess’ tent, which also serves as a shrine of the tiger god, holds the
pride's treasure, 1,750 sp and a wooden tiger figurine carved from teak
and worth 75 gp.

Taer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 slams (1d4+1) or weapon (1d6+1)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Stench, immunity to cold
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Taer are shaggy, primitive, naked humanoids that may be related to
the yeti. They resemble prehistoric humans but are more bestial and
apelike. Their fur is coated with an oily, fatty substance excreted through
the pores, which protects them from cold. Taer can see clearly even in
heavy snowstorms due to a second transparent eyelid that protects the eye
from blowing winds and heavy snow. Taer never wear clothing, although
they do sometimes wear necklaces and bracelets of tooth and horn. Taer
communicate through grunts, hooting, and yelling, as well as a body
language similar to that of apes.

Taer attack with their claws and bite, but occasionally use stone spears
in combat. They are fierce creatures and very territorial, attacking any
living creature that wanders into the area. Taer use their knowledge of the
land to their advantage during combat by creating avalanches, burrowing
under snow and attacking from surprise, and using snow-covered pits to
trap their prey. They prefer to drive intruders off rather than kill them.
A taer's body secretes a foul-smelling oil that nearly every form of
animal life finds offensive (even troglodytes). All living creatures (except
taers) within 10 feet of a taer must succeed on a saving throw or suffer a
-1 penalty to hit and damage.

Taer Society Taers are nomadic creatures that band together in clans for
protection, hunting, and social reasons. During the day, adults hunt for food,
which consists of fruits, berries, nuts, insects, and game (goat, sheep,
rodents, and the like). Though they do eat meat, taer do not hunt or eat
humans or humanoids. Taer are extremely superstitious and fear metal and
clothing and those that use and wear them. No taer ever wields or wears items
of cloth or metal. Taer clans worship a snow-god to whom they offer sacrifices
for protection and guidance. Each clan has a large stone idol of this snow god
that is often located in the very heart of the clan or near the clan leader's
cave.

Credit: The Taer originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice:  Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Cut ‘Em Off at the Pass
A small silver mining operation depends on a high mountain pass to get
its silver to the great city beyond the mountains. Unfortunately, severe
snowstorms and the presence of a clan of 1d4 x 10 taer has closed the
pass.

The taer dwell in a high cave complex and haunt the ledges and chasms
surrounding the pass hunting for food. They have raided one caravan (for
food), and the rather cowardly merchant that owns and operates the mine
is hesitant to send more people through. The hooting and hollering of the
taer can be heard echoing through the mine's valley at night, and people
are terribly unnerved.

The taer's cave complex consists of a large common room containing
sleeping pallets (or nests) for the common taer. A lower cavern has
become the clan garbage pit and now contains hundreds of splintered
bones and other refuse. A higher cavern is clad in ice (from water seeping
from the mountains above) and is now used as a sort of temple by the taer.
Animal skins and teeth have been placed next to the ice pillars as offering
for the gods. This cavern leads to an icy chute that heads deeper into the
mountain and a higher cavern, mostly free of ice, being used as the living
quarters of the clan's leader, a large 6 HD male with a black patch of hair
on the top of its head. The taer have no real treasure - perhaps 1d4 x 100
gp worth of animal skins and teeth.

Tangtal (Dupli-Cat)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4+1), 1 bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Duplicate
Move: 15/6 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A tangtal is about 7 feet long from nose to tail and weighs about 350
to 400 pounds. It has short, stiff fur, dark brown in color. Small white
flecks cover its head, throat and neck, and shoulders. Its legs are long and
powerful and end in sharpened claws. It has a long, upward curving tail
with a white tip. Once per day, a tangtal can create up to 8 duplicates of
itself (otherwise similar to mirror image spell).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Mirror Image
The Terashee Carnival pitched its multicolored tents on land outside
Landrey. A midway attracts people with games of chance and separates
them from their hard-earned coin. Magister Anxes’ Mirror Maze is
especially popular, drawing people in droves to negotiate the twists and
turns of the mirrored passages, the thrill of seeing so many versions of
themselves walking along with them in the silver-backed glass something
they’d talk about for days and days on end. What the visitors see as a
nice diversion from their humdrum lives, a tangtal that lairs in the nearby
forest sees as a fantastic hunting ground. The big cat dug an entry tunnel
beneath one of the outer walls and quietly slipped inside to stalk prey. The
carnival trapped the cat inside the maze once the screaming began, but no
one is willing to go in after the beast or to help the people trapped inside.

Tazelwurm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6), 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Camouflage, frightening exuviation, resists fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Tazelwurms appear as 9-foot long serpents with gray-colored scales.
Their head is leonine and resembles a maneless lion with brownish-tan or
gray fur. Two long, powerful humanoid arms of the same gray color as its
body protrude from its serpentine body. Each arm ends in a slender, fourtaloned hand. Its talons average 9 inches in length and fade to black near
the tips. Very old tazelwurms may even have lichens and mosses growing
on them, enhancing their rocky appearances. If a tazelwurm is hit by a fire
attack or effect that deals at least 10 points of damage, it takes no damage,
but instead allows its scales, flesh, and fur to be consumed and burned
away in a single round, exposing its skeletal structure. A creature viewing
this must make a save or be paralyzed with fear for 1d3 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Snake Warrens
The Kylar Pass is a narrow route through the high peaks of the Khandibat
Mountains, but anyone daring the treacherous switchback trail risks life
and limb doing so. Fierce storms roll through the peaks, with driving rains
and gusting winds.
The high peaks contain a maze of round tunnels about 4 feet in diameter.
These winding tunnels twist and turn throughout the granite peaks. Two
tazelwurms live in the warrens. The male is a 10-foot-long creature, while
the female is a true beast: 25 feet from lion's head to the tip of her snake
tail. The pair target travelers.
Inside the warren are the bones of past meals, as well as 600 gp, a ring
of human control, and a battered suit of +1 plate mail armor.

Temporal Crawler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d6 + paralysis)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Paralysis, slowing webs
Move: 12/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A temporal crawler is a 6-foot-long hairy, gray spider with a large
hourglass-shaped patch of silver fur dominating its back. Upon closer
inspection, it appears that the hourglass is animated and that sand runs
from one chamber to the other. The temporal crawler's mandibles seem to
be constructed of silver and bounce light off of them. The creature's many
eyes are bright red. Temporal crawlers spin webs to catch creatures. Once
a victim enters the web, it must save or be affected by a slow spell. The
spider paralyzes its prey with its bite for 1 round.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

A Place Where Time Stands Still
An underground cavern is filled wall to wall with sticky webs. Hundreds
of bodies are ensnared in the spider silk, hanging from the ceiling walls
and even cocooned as lumps on the rocky ground. Most of the bodies are
desiccated and brittle. A few are nothing more than bones stuck in the
webs. Two human travelers and an elf magic-user struggle in the webs.
A large crystal globe hangs down from the 40-foot-high ceiling. The
eight-sided globe is suspended by a number of thick spider webs. The
glass sides of the globe are opaque. A temporal crawler sleeps inside the
glass globe.
All movement in the cavern is slowed to half speed by the giant spider.
It is a vicious hunter that crawls to the surface every night to snatch
travelers to cocoon in its web.

Tendrul
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8) and 1 tail (1d6)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: gnashing teeth
Move: 9/30 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

The amphibious tendrul is the size of a small whale and has a pair of
powerful flippers with which it pulls itself from the waters to sun itself
on the stones. It has a head reminiscent of a piranha, the body of a giant
grayish-black seal, and a bony razor-sharp scythe-like tail. An average
tendrul reaches 12 feet long and weighs several hundred pounds. If a
tendrul scores a natural 20 on its attack roll with its gnashing-teeth bite,
it deals triple normal damage. A tendrul notices creatures by scent in a
90-foot radius and detects blood in the water at ranges of up to 500 feet.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Don’t Go In the Water
The white sandy beach near the northern merchant city of Ivor is covered
in blood and blubber. The tail of a half-eaten sperm whale lies near the
waterline. The tide is frothy and pink with rivers of blood, and chunks of
the whale float atop the waves. The whale's tail section is torn and jagged,
the blubbery flesh bitten clean through by sharp, serrated teeth.
A tendrul caught the poor whale in the open water, and dragged it to
shore to devour. The huge beast is submerged in the silt offshore, but
bursts out of the sand once it realizes PCs are disturbing the rest of its
meal. The giant carnivorous beast flops onto the beach, chasing PCs and
slashing with its scythe-like tail. Anyone caught in its mouth is instantly
ground between its sharp teeth.

Tenebrous Worm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack:  Bite (2d6 plus 1d6 acid)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Acid, bristles
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1700

A tenebrous worm resembles a 6-foot long, sleek, gray caterpillar. The
front half of its body, including its head, is covered in long, dull, black
coarse bristles. Two large, multi-faceted eyes dot its head and two large,
pearl white mandibles flank its mouth.
The tenebrous worm is native to the Plane of Shadow and is rarely
encountered elsewhere. On occasion, a tear in the fabric of the planes
allows the worm to slip through to other planes of existence. Tenebrous
worms enjoy attacking and devouring living creatures, though they do not
normally attack anything larger than themselves.
Its mandibles can be broken off or pried from a dead tenebrous worm
and sold for 1d3 x 1,000 gp each. The tenebrous worm is the larvae stage
of the gloomwing (see that entry).
A tenebrous worm's head and upper body is covered in many small
bristles. When biting, the creature thrashes about striking with them. An
opponent hit by a tenebrous worm's bristles must succeed on a saving
throw or be paralyzed for 1d4 rounds. When the paralysis wears off, the
opponent takes 3d6 points of damage from the poison. A creature attacking
a tenebrous worm unarmed or with natural weapons must succeed on a
saving throw each time one of their attacks hits or be subjected to the
same paralysis and subsequent damage as above.

Credit: The Tenebrous Worm originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Water Rights in the Desert
In a blasted wasteland of reddish-gray sand, creosote bushes and bearpaw poppies, a devilish shaman has brought forth a portion of the plane of
shadow into a complex of sandstone caverns that overlooks a lonely river.
The shadowy caverns are inhabited by a tenebrous worm that is only held
at bay by the unforgiving desert sun. At night, it stalks forth in search of
prey (its first meal being the foolish shaman that summoned it).
Worse yet, the shadowstuff has begun to spread out of the cavern. It now
covers an area 1 mile in diameter and has caused the river that emerges
from it to freeze for 2 miles beyond the shadow. The human fishing
village built on the shores of a lake fed by the river have seen the river
run almost dry and the lake become freezing, killing off their fish. The
villagers suspect it was their old shaman, recently exiled for “inhuman
acts”, but do not know of his whereabouts.

Tentacled Horror
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attacks: 4 tentacles (1d8), 1 bite (3d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Constrict, regenerates 5 hp/round,
aura of insanity
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2,600

Exuding a foul oily slime wherever it goes, a
tentacled horror has a powerful humanoid torso
that ends in a thick slug-like foot. Sprouting
from the torso are four whip-like tentacles tipped
in cruel barbs. A tentacled horror has a shapeless
head with a single, huge, unblinking eye. The
mouth is a yawning chasm of sharp teeth. Above
the eye is a glistening black 2-foot-long horn.
Tentacled horrors attack with their tentacles to rip and
tear at opponents. If two tentacles hit the same opponent,
the foe is held and constricted for automatic 2d8 damage
and pulled toward the creature's mouth for automatic
bite damage (3d6) on the next round. Creatures with
fewer than 6 HD who view a tentacle horror must
save or be affected as if by a fear spell. Tentacled
horrors regenerate 5 hp per round.

The Island Rises
Moss-covered ruins rise in ocean. The island
is nearly 2 miles across, and every inch is covered
in stone ruins that nearly merge into one continuous
structure. Twisting alleys of claustrophobic tunnels
zigzag through the buildings. Red brick and slick
pale marble fit together in a patterned mosaic on
the streets. The buildings are filled with hanging
strands of seaweed, scuttling crabs and dead fish.
Indecipherable sigils are carved into the stone walls.
A stone arena in the center of the island has high columns carved
to resemble tentacled sea creatures. Three paved roads lead into the
amphitheater, and stone benches surround a central arena. Ramps lead
into water-filled dungeons beneath the amphitheater. Thick oily slime
leads down the ramps.
A tribe of 40 goblins make their way through the stone streets and
abandoned buildings. The goblins decorate themselves with dead squids
left on the brick streets. The creatures sailed to the island aboard a small
ship that broke up on the rocks. The tribe's shaman had a vision of the
island and led his minions here.
A tentacled horror rose from the sea with the island and lives in the
pools beneath the arena. It slides up the ramps to face creatures entering
its arena. The island is tied to the creature's life force. If it is slain, the
island crumbles quickly and sinks back into the sea. Creatures in the
center of the island face a gauntlet of breaking stone and waterspouts as
they race for the shoreline.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Tentamort
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  2 tentacles (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Grab, liquefy organs
Move: 3/3 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/600

A tentamort has a small spherical body of gray flesh. Two long tentacles
protrude from the upper half of the sphere while eight smaller tentacles
hang from the bottom of its spherical body. One tentacle ends in a squidlike appendage while the other ends in a needle-like barb.
Tentamorts are rarely encountered above ground, preferring the darkness
of underground caverns and dungeons. The tentamort resembles a squid.

Its body is a small, 3-foot diameter sphere of gray, hard flesh. Two 10-foot
long tentacles protrude from the upper half of its body while eight 2-foot
long tentacles hang from the bottom of its spherical body (it uses these for
movement only). Of the two large tentacles, the left ends in a squid-like
appendage and the right in a long, needle-sharp barb. A tentamort uses
its small tentacles to hold itself to ceilings and walls. When prey passes
underneath, it drops on its opponent, grabbing it with its tentacles and
injecting it with its deadly acid.

Creatures struck by the tentamort's tentacles must pass a saving throw
or be held fast and squeezed for an automatic 1d4 points of damage each
round. They can escape by chopping off a tentacle (12 hp each) or
making a successful roll to open doors. A tentamort always attempts to
grab a foe with its rightmost tentacle so it can stab the opponent with the
needle-like barb on its left tentacle.

After grabbing a foe with its rightmost tentacle, a tentamort can insert
the needle-like projection from its leftmost tentacle into the foe's body
(requires a successful melee attack). Once inserted, the tentamort injects
its acidic saliva through the hollow barb and liquefies the victim's internal
organs, which the creature then draws through the tube and into its own
body. This attack deals 1d4 points of constitution damage each round the
tube remains inserted in a foe and 1 point of constitution damage for 1d2
rounds after the needle is removed.

A cure disease, restoration or wish spell halts the constitution damage
after the needle has been removed. A creature slain by this attack can only
be raised by the casting of a wish.

Credit: The Tentamort originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Mike
Roberts.

Liquefaction or Liquification?
At the confluence of three rivers there is a vast moorland of twisted
trees and tall grasses. In the lagoons of the moorland there dwell pelicans,
swans, ermines, wolves and wild boars (2 in 6 chance of a significant
encounter each day). On the edges of the moorland there are signs of
former human habitation in the form of old mills and abandoned, toppled
cottages.
The moorland once supported a large population, as population pressures
in nearby city-states drove farmers into the moors. One of the ex-residents
was an alchemist, who chemical infusions into the swampland gave rise
to a number of strange creatures (owlbears, for example), including a
brood of 1d4+1 tentamorts that hatched from befouled swan eggs. The
tentamorts eventually ran people out of the area, and even claimed the
life of the alchemist. His ruined tower still stands in the middle of a pond
inhabited by the descendants of the original tentamorts.
Rumors in the nearest city-state claim that the alchemist was working
on coating seven magic swords with an alchemical essence of silver when
he was killed.

Thermite, Worker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: Bite (1d4 + 1d4 fire)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Burn, heat (1d4), immune to fire
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Thermites are reddish-hued giant termites. Immense heat radiates
from their bodies. They are 5 or 6 feet long with large biting mandibles
and segmented antennae. A hive can hold as many as 100 thermites, in
a worker-to-warrior ratio of 1:5. A hive also contains one giant queen
thermite. When a thermite hits with its bite attack, the opponent must save
or catch on fire. Touching or being touched by a thermite automatically
deals 1d4 points of fire damage. There are tales of winged thermites.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Thermite, Soldier
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: Bite (1d6 + 1d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Burn, death throes, heat 1d6, immune to fire
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Thermite warriors are reddish-hued giant termites. Immense heat
radiates from their bodies. They are 5 or 6 feet long with large biting
mandibles and segmented antennae. When a thermite warrior hits with
its bite attack, the opponent must save or catch on fire. Touching or being
touched by a thermite automatically deals 1d6 points of fire damage.
A warrior thermite explodes in a ball of fire dealing 3d6 points of fire
damage to all within a 10-foot radius when slain. A successful save
reduces the damage by half.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Thermite, Queen
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: Bite (1d8 + 1d8 fire)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Burn, death throes, heat 2d6, immune to fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Thermite queens are reddish-hued giant termites. Immense heat radiates
from their bodies. A thermite hive contains one queen. When a thermite
queen hits with its bite attack, the opponent must save or catch on fire.
Touching or being touched by a thermite queen automatically deals 2d6
points of fire damage. A thermite queen explodes in a ball of fire dealing
8d6 points of fire damage to all within a 10-foot radius when slain. A
successful save reduces the damage by half.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Glass Desert
The blistering heat of the desert blasts PCs, with winds whipping sands
into their faces and the sun baking their flesh. Shifting dunes make travel
difficult. One large section of the desert is covered by a foot-thick field
of clear glass that stretches for nearly a mile. The glass is incredibly hot
as it reflects the sun, but safe to walk on. Skeletons sunk to the waist – or
deeper – stick out of the glass plain. Those above the glass are bleached
white by the sun and stinging grit, while below the glass their bodies
are sun-burned, mummified flesh. Wagon wheels jut from the glass,
although the wagons are missing. Weapons can be found completely, each
completely encased in the clear surface.

Broken holes descend into man-size tunnels. These tunnels are slick
glass tubes cut into the sand with sharp ridges slicing upward. Any PC
sliding down a tube takes 3d6 points of damage from the sharp edges.
The glass plain is the creation of a colony of thermites. Their bodies
generate the heat that turns the sand into glass around them as they burrow.
The tubes lead into the colony's home, where hundreds of worker and
soldier thermites can be found. A queen is protected in a glass chamber
deep inside the colony. The thermites react to anyone making too much
noise on the upper glass and defend their tunnels from invaders.



Therianthrope, Asswere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Bite (1d4) or weapon (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Bray, only harmed by silver weapons
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Therianthropes (sometimes called anthromorphs or weretherions) are animals
that can assume a human or hybrid form (the latter combining traits of both
their human and animal forms). They are akin to lycanthropes (in that they are
shapechangers), but therianthropes are not lycanthropes and do not carry or
induce lycanthropy.  All therianthropes in human form have slightly feral
characteristics.

Assweres in humanoid form are indistinguishable from other humanoids. In
hybrid form they look like donkey-headed humanoids covered in blackish-gray
fur and standing 6 feet tall.  An asswere can loose a loud bray as a standard
action. All creatures within 30 feet that hear it must succeed on a saving
throw or be affected as by a confusion spell for 1d4+3 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.


Therianthrope, Foxwere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d4) or
weapon (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Charm gaze, only harmed by silver weapons, surprise on roll of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Therianthropes (sometimes called anthromorphs or weretherions) are animals
that can assume a human or hybrid form (the latter combining traits of both
their human and animal forms). They are akin to lycanthropes (in that they are
shapechangers), but therianthropes are not lycanthropes and do not carry or
induce lycanthropy.  All therianthropes in human form have slightly feral
characteristics.

Foxweres in humanoid form are indistinguishable from normal humanoids, though
most have reddish-colored hair. In hybrid form, they look like fox-headed
humanoids standing 5 feet tall and covered in reddish fur. A sleek, white
stripe runs the length of its back.

Any creature within 30 feet that meets the creature's gaze must succeed
on a saving throw or be affected as by a charm monster spell.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Therianthrope, Jackalwere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d6) or weapon (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Sleep gaze, only harmed by silver weapons
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Therianthropes (sometimes called anthromorphs or weretherions) are animals
that can assume a human or hybrid form (the latter combining traits of both
their human and animal forms). They are akin to lycanthropes (in that they are
shapechangers), but therianthropes are not lycanthropes and do not carry or
induce lycanthropy.  All therianthropes in human form have slightly feral
characteristics.

Jackalweres in humanoid form usually have dark eyes and dark skin,
but are otherwise indistinguishable from other humanoids. In hybrid form
they look like jackal-headed humanoid with dark fur and dark eyes.
Any creature within 30 feet that meets the creature's gaze falls asleep
for 3 minutes if it fails a saving throw. This ability functions as the sleep
spell, but there is no HD limit to the number of creatures it can affect.

Credit: The Jackalwere originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Therianthrope, Owlwere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 talons (1d4 plus disease) or weapon (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Disease, only harmed by silver weapons, surprise on
roll of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 12/15 (flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Therianthropes (sometimes called anthromorphs or weretherions) are animals
that can assume a human or hybrid form (the latter combining traits of both
their human and animal forms). They are akin to lycanthropes (in that they are
shapechangers), but therianthropes are not lycanthropes and do not carry or
induce lycanthropy.  All therianthropes in human form have slightly feral
characteristics.

Owlweres appear as normal humanoids in humanoid form, often
timid and shy. In hybrid form it appears as a lithe and small owl-headed
humanoid with brownish-yellow feathers and white eyes. An owlwere's
talons can infect people who fail a saving throw with an aching disease
that imposes a -2 penalty to hit and damage until two daily saving throws
are made back-to-back.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Therianthrope, Lionwere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d8) or weapon (1d8) and
bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Weakness gaze, only harmed by silver weapons,
surprise on roll of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Therianthropes (sometimes called anthromorphs or weretherions) are animals
that can assume a human or hybrid form (the latter combining traits of both
their human and animal forms). They are akin to lycanthropes (in that they are
shapechangers), but therianthropes are not lycanthropes and do not carry or
induce lycanthropy.  All therianthropes in human form have slightly feral
characteristics.

Lionweres appear as normal humanoids when in humanoid form,
though most are stocky and muscular. In hybrid form the appear as lionheaded humanoids with large golden mane. Its body is covered in golden
brown fur and its eyes are greenish-gray.
Any creature within 30 feet that meets the creature's gaze takes 1d4+1
points of strength damage. A successful saving throw negates the damage.
A lionwere can use this ability twice per day.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Therianthrope, Wolfwere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d6) or weapon (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Song of lethargy, only harmed by silver weapon
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Therianthropes (sometimes called anthromorphs or weretherions) are animals
that can assume a human or hybrid form (the latter combining traits of both
their human and animal forms). They are akin to lycanthropes (in that they are
shapechangers), but therianthropes are not lycanthropes and do not carry or
induce lycanthropy.  All therianthropes in human form have slightly feral
characteristics.

In humanoid form, a wolfwere appears as a normal humanoid, often with grayish
hair. In hybrid form it has a wolf's head and its body is covered in short
gray fur. Its hands end in sharpened claws.

By speaking or singing, a wolfwere can slow all creatures within 60 feet that
hear it if they fail a saving throw. The slow effects last 1d4+3 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Therianthrope, Mulewere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  2 hooves (1d4) or weapon (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Bray, only harmed by silver weapons
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Therianthropes (sometimes called anthromorphs or weretherions) are animals
that can assume a human or hybrid form (the latter combining traits of both
their human and animal forms). They are akin to lycanthropes (in that they are
shapechangers), but therianthropes are not lycanthropes and do not carry or
induce lycanthropy.  All therianthropes in human form have slightly feral
characteristics.

Muleweres in humanoid form are indistinguishable from other
humanoids. In hybrid form it appears as a mule-headed humanoid with
grayish-black fur and brown eyes.

All creatures within 30 feet that hear the mulewere must succeed on a
saving throw or become panicked for 2d4 rounds. Creatures further away
but within 200 feet must succeed on a saving throw or become frightened
for 2d4 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Council Rock
Overlooking the savannah, near the forested gorge and a many miles
south of the blazing desert is the outcropping called Council Rock.
Here, the eldest of the therianthropes, the animal men that dominate the
surrounding lands, meet to plan their campaigns against the humans that
press them from every direction.

On the nights of the full moon they gather atop the old outcropping of
granite, its slopes decorated with trailing vines bearing fragrant blossoms.
There is the seductive foxwere, whose people govern the underbrush and
collect tribute from the rodents and birds; the asswere, whose people run
the desert sands, preying on superstitious caravaneers; the lionwere, who
considers his people the kings of all beasts - whether two or four-legged;
the owlwere, whose people haunt the night and carry their terror into
human lands; the jackalwere, always listening, rarely speaking and the
wolfwere, whose people rule the forested gorge and who council most
vehemently for the destruction of man.

Dug into the granite outcropping are three pits covered by wooden
grates held down with large stones. Here, the beast lords place their
prisoners, questioning and torturing them at their leisure.

Therianthrope, Dire Wolfwere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6+6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d4), 1 weapon (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: hit only by magical weapons, weakness gaze
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 20/3,400

Primeval wolfweres in human form stand around 6 to 6-1/2 feet tall and
have grayish-brown or grayish-black hair. Their features are sharp and
well-formed, but otherwise unremarkable. A primeval wolfwere in hybrid form
looks like a bipedal wolf with dark gray fur and yellow eyes.  It stands about
9 feet tall and weighs about 800 pounds. The gaze of a primeval wolfwere makes
opponents physically weak, imposing a -1

River Pirates
A sizable flatboat named the the Wastrel cruises up and down the Krell
River looking for passengers. The boat is powered by two enchanted
paddlewheels on each side that propel it through the water. The ship has
three decks, with curving railings carved by a master carver. The bridge
sits at the front of the top deck, affording the pilot a full view of the river
ahead. The ship's figurehead is a snarling wolf of gleaming silver.
During the day and most nights, the Wastrel and its crew pose as
wealthy revelers out enjoying the river. The flatboat has a reputation for
outlandish revelry and all-day parties where expensive wines flow freely.
On nights of the full moon, however, their true nature is revealed: The
Wastrel's crew and passengers are river pirates infected with lycanthropy.
Stella, a primeval wolfwere, leads the vicious werewolves.
A bronze nozzle attached to a large bellows below deck lets the flatboat
spew burning oil on the wealthy merchant vessels with devastating
effects. Treasure from the pirates’ victims fills the belly of the ship. No
one who encounters the Wastrel during nights of the full moon is left alive
to spread the crews’ secret.

Credit: The Wolfwere originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.


THESSALMONSTERS

Thessalmonsters are nocturnal predators that resemble a cross between an
eight-headed hydra and another monster.  The true origin of the thessalmonster
lies shrouded in mystery, but many sages speculate the creature is the result
of an arcane experiment gone awry involving an ancient thessalhydra and other
monsters.

Thessalmonsters are a combination of a thessalhydra and another creature.
Thessalmonsters resemble hydras, complete with reptilian torso and eight
serpentine heads around its central front. Some thessalmonsters retain the
base creature's head while others lose it and have it replaced with a central
maw filled with serrated teeth.

Thessalhydra
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  8 serpentine bites (2d6 plus 1d6 acid) and tail slash
(2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spit acid, heal 2 hp/round, immunity to acid
Move: 15/9 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2000

This creature is a massive reptilian beast with four stump-like legs and
a multitude of heads surrounding a central maw filled with oversized teeth.
Its body is reddish-gold and scaled. A long serpentine tail extends from its
body and ends in a pincer-like claw. A typical thessalhydra stands almost
20 feet tall and measures 30 feet from front to tail. It weighs about 15,000
pounds.

A thessalhydra deals 1d6 points of acid damage with a serpentine bite.  Once
per day, a thessalhydra can spit acid in a 40-ft. line that deals 4d6 points
of acid damage (save for half damage).

Credit: The Thessalhydra originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax and Wizards of the Coast.

Thessalgorgon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  8 serpentine bites (2d6 plus 1d6 acid) and gore (2d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Breath weapon, immunity to acid, heal 2 hp/round
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2000

Thessalgorgons are a cross between a gorgon and a thessalhydra. They
attack intruders on sight, attempting to trample, gore, or petrify them.
There is no way to calm these furious creatures, and they are impossible
to domesticate.

A thessalgorgon has a large central bull-like head is ringed by eight
snake-like heads, each spitting and hissing. Its entire body is covered in
thick, metallic scales of coppery-green. A typical thessalgorgon stands
over 12 feet tall at the shoulder and measures 24 feet from snout to tail. It
weighs about 8,000 pounds.

A thessalgorgon deals 1d6 points of acid damage with a serpentine
bite. Once every 1d4 rounds and no more than five times per day, a
thessalgorgon can exhale a 60-ft long and 40-ft wide cone of gas that
turns people to stone (saving throw to negate).

Credit: The Thessalgorgon originally appeared in the Monstrous Compendium (MC
3) (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1989). All are used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax and Wizards of the Coast.

Thessalisk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  8 serpentine bites (1d8 plus 1d6 acid) and tail slash (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Acid, petrifying gaze, spit acid, immunity to acid,
heal 2 hp/round
Move: 15
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

A thessalisk is a cross between a basilisk and a thessalhydra. Its body
grows to about 12 feet long, not including its tail, which can reach an
additional length of 10 to 20 feet. The creature weighs about 800 pounds.
It has eight, short legs, a short, powerful tail that ends in a pincer-like
claw and a thick, barrel-like body. A large reptilian head with emerald
green eyes is encircled by eight serpentine heads.

A thessalisk deals 1d6 points of acid damage with a serpentine bite.
Once per day it can spit a 40-ft line of acid that deals 4d6 points of
damage (save for half damage).

The creature's gaze turn to stone permanently people within 30 feet who
look into its eyes. A saving throw negates the effect.


Unstable Bridges
The tunnel the adventurers have been following finally ends in a sheer
drop. The cavern beyond is massive. The floor is 40 feet below and
covered in slimy, brackish water, which is itself 5 to 8 feet deep. The
ceiling is 30 feet above and covered in dripping stalactites. The cavern
is at least 300 feet in diameter, the walls sheer and slick. Phosphorescent
swamp gasses illuminate the cavern with the equivalent of twilight, and
gouts of flame often erupt from the floor. Acrid fumes and the scent of
rotting vegetation assault the nose.

Rising from the subterranean swamp there is what appears to be a
mountain in miniature, only 40 feet tall, with sloping sides that must
have been carved by humanoid hands. The top of this mound is flat and
can be reached by a long bridge of rope and metallic discs. Two other
bridges extend from the mound to other walls of the cave that are pierced
with caves.

The bridges are sturdy enough to hold up to eight encumbered
individuals at a time, though they sway uncomfortably as one walks and
running or fighting on a bridge carries a 1 in 10 chance each round of
causing the bridge to flip and deposit people into the waters below.
When one reaches the mound they will likely step on a pressure plate
adjacent to the bridge they have just crossed. This pressure plate triggers
a slim, brass pole that rises from the center of the mound and causes every
third metallic disk of each bridge to become ethereal (1 in 6 chance to
notice this intangibility, 2 in 6 for elves). This bar hums with energy and
gives off minor shocks if touched. The top of the bar is a loop of metal,
into which one can shove a wooden or metal pole (or staff, club, haft,
etc). Turning the loop to face a bridge causes its discs to become material
again.

Stepping on an ethereal disc forces one to pass a saving throw or fall into
the swamp, which is inhabited by three thessalhydras. The thessalhydras
live in submerged lairs in the base of the mound. Each lair holds 1d4 x
1,000 sp and 1d4 x 1,000 gp contained in cylinders of the same metal as
the discs. The cylinders have no obvious way of opening them, but can be
turned intangible with the application of electricity.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Thorny
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Thorns, surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Thornies are the pets and companions of the vegepygmies. They are rarely
encountered outside of a vegepygmy tribe or hunting party. Vegepygmies
often use them to hunt prey. They look like hunting dogs formed of
tangled briars, vines, leaves and sticks.

Thornies reproduce by planting egg-like seeds (that the female lays) in
the ground. Three to six months later, a small tree sprouts, buds, and from
these buds are born the thornies. An average thorny tree is capable of
producing 1d6+4 thornies. The tree dies once it buds and the thornies
“hatch.”

A thorny's body is covered with sharp wooden thorns. Any creature
attacking a thorny unarmed, with a handheld weapon, or with natural
attacks takes 1d4 points of damage from the thorny's sharpened thorns. A
creature that grapples with a thorny takes this same damage each round.

Midriff Protection is Necessary
A pack of 1d6+2 wild thornies has made a lair for itself in a patch
of brambles. In the middle of the patch there are three thorny trees
growing, each supporting 1d6+4 wriggling buds. The thornies patrol the
surrounding landscape of tall pines and golden river gorges. Half the pack
is always lurking around the clearing where they have planted their trees,
and defend the area ferociously.

Just beyond the thorny trees there is an old cave with a low ceiling
and significant piles of rubble. From the appearance of the rubble, the
cave was a gold mine. Under one pile of rubble there is a partially buried
skeleton wearing a dried out shirt of ringed armor with a rusty dirk (a
+1 dagger) lodged in its ribs. Behind this pile of rubble there is a small
tunnel entrance to a lower set of limestone caverns filled with spectacular
formations and a veritable sea of slime.

A second skeleton, this one wearing what is best described as a mail
halter and loinclout, is draped over one of the stalagmites that rise from
the slime. The skeleton still has long, golden hair and wears a silver ring
(protection from undead) one one bony finger. The cave is also inhabited
by three ochre jellies.

A high stone shelf in the slime cavern gives access to a dry, dusty
cavern. One must scoot on their belly through a 3-foot high and 10-foot
wide passage to access this cavern. Here, there is a large idol carved from
the native limestone and stained in purples and rust-reds with two large
eyes of mirror-like platinum (worth 100 gp each). This demonic idol is
surrounded by bowls containing long dried grapes and plums, apparent
offerings. One every three months, the idol gives out a long, low groan
that causes the ground to rumble and attracts the vegepygmy tribes in
the area to come and worship. All those in the presence of the idol when
it groans find themselves covered in a silvery dust that falls from the
ceiling. The dust makes their skin sparkle (until washed) and grants them
a +2 reaction bonus from all plant creatures.

In addition to the silvery dust, the idol becomes ethereal for a few
minutes after groaning, revealing a round shaft located beneath it. This
shaft leads to whatever adventures the Referee has a mind to run.

Credit: The Thorny originally appeared in the First Edition module S3
Expedition to the Barrier Peaks (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1980) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and
is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Thorny Tyrannosaurus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 19
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: Bite (4d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Thrash, thorns
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 20/2,700

A thorny tyrannosaurus is a dinosaur constructed entirely of thorns,
tangled brush, and leaves. If the creature bites a victim, it draws the victim
into its jaws and inflicts automatic bite damage each round thereafter
as it thrashes and chews the creature. Any creature attacking a thorny
tyrannosaurus unarmed or with weapons automatically takes 1d6 points
of damage from the large thorns that make up its body.

The Island City of Verdurn

Austallos Lake formed in the high peaks of a massive volcanic crater
within the remote mountain frontier. The warm lake is shallow, making
travel by large ships hazardous. The algae-filled lake spans nearly 10
miles and is 5 miles across at its widest point. The lake reaches a depth
of 10 feet but averages around 4 foot. Large natural rock formations and
boulders lie strewn in the lake, creating a natural maze. Lost in time there
existed an island city in the midst of the mountain lake. The vanished
inhabitants left all possessions and structures.
A band of vegepygmies claimed the island as their domain. A thorny
tyrannosaurus guards the island, roaming through the vegetation on the
edges of the beach. In addition, the vegepygmies have planted patches of
russet mold and shriekers and have plant-imbued apes guarding their lair
inside one of the empty buildings in the heart of the island.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Leech, Throat
The throat leech is a 1-inch long grey leech that lairs in fresh streams,
pools, underground springs, and the like. When a living creature consumes
liquid containing a throat leech, the leech attaches itself to the back of
the victim's throat and begins draining blood. This deals 1d6 points of
damage each round. Once the leech has inflicted 12 points of damage, it
ceases draining (but does not detach). When a throat leech has sated itself,
its body swells thereby suffocating the host.
A cure disease spell kills a throat leech as does an application of fire that
deals at least one point of fire damage.

Clear Your Throat

As you approach this next chamber, the sound of running,
splashing water is clearly heard. The room appears to have once been a bath of
some sort. The center of the chamber (22 feet by 22 feet, 16 foot high
ceiling) is sunken about 4 feet to form a 14-foot y 14-foot pool. The pool is
clad in dingy marble and the walls are covered in sparkling blue tiles.  Water
pours into the pool from a tarnished brass pipe in the ceiling crafted in the
shape of a curvaceous mermaid. Water also spills into the pool from two places
in the ceiling where the plumbing has apparently burst. A drain in the bottom
of the pool allows water to escape. The water pouring from the ceiling is
warm, but the water in the pool is tepid. The pool is inhabited by a number of
throat leeches that blend in with the dingy
marble and are usually hidden by the froth kicked up in the pool by the
water pouring into it. A large copper medallion (worth 3 cp) has fallen
into the pool, and bears the image of an ancient king on one side and the
goddess of victory on the other.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian Livingstone.

Credit: The Throat Leech originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Thunder Beast
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Breath weapon, trample
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A thunder beast is huge animal with a hippo-like head with pointed piglike ears. It has a large, wide mouth with small upright tusks jutting from
its lower jaw. Its long body is thick and hunched. Six powerful legs aid
the creature in locomotion. A typical thunder beast is about 20 feet long.
It is yellow-brown, ochre, or olive in color, mottled dark brown or black.
Thunder beasts are herd animals that spend their time roaming the
uncountable layers of the Abyss sustaining themselves on a diet of rotted
plants, manes demons, and other inconsequential life forms.
Every 1d4 rounds, a thunder beast can exhale a semi-noxious cloud of
gas that spreads to fill an area 20 feet high in a 20-foot radius. Living
creatures in the area must succeed on a saving throw or suffer a -1 penalty
to hit, damage and make saving throws as long as they remain in the area
and for one round after leaving the area. The cloud lasts 1d4 rounds before
dispersing. A strong wind (21+ mph) disperses the cloud in 1 round.
The thunder beast can trample creatures by simply moving over the top
of them. Thunder beasts cause 2d6 points of damage when they trample.
Trampled folk who attempt to dodge receive a saving throw to negate half
of the damage. Those who stand their ground can make an attack at +2 to
hit and damage.

Credit: The Thunder Beast originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Arena of the Damned
One of the myriad planes of the Abyss is home to a reeking jungle of
eternally rotting vegetation, roaming herds of 5d4 thunder beasts (+50%
as many noncombatant calves) and bands of manes set loose in the
jungle by more powerful demons as a punishment for displeasing them.
Rising above the jungles is a basalt spire. The spire does not appear to
be a construction, rather rising from the plane fully formed. The spire
is slightly crooked. At the top of the spire, which is about a 1/2 mile in
diameter and 7 miles tall, there is a prison holding a movanic deva. The
light of the movanic deva once shone across the twilight jungle, but has
dimmed considerably over the centuries. The angel was imprisoned here
by mighty Orcus, who is waiting for the creature to slowly lose its faith
and become a demon.
The prison chamber looks like a vast arena with a diameter of 500 feet
and a vaulted, rust red ceiling. The angel is chained in the center and
tormented day and night by succubi, vrock and marilith demons, who
emerge via passages that lead to the lower levels of the spire. The spire
is a prison and dungeon for powerful prisoners of the various demon
princes. It is guarded by retrievers and inhabited by a myraid of oozes
and puddings furnished by the Faceless Lord.
Each day spent in the jungle carries with it a 1 in 6 chance of encountering
a band of 1d4+5 mane demons and a 2 in 6 chance of encountering a herd
of thunder beasts. The thunder beasts are sometimes trapped by the more
powerful demons, who use them like war elephants in their struggles
against rivals.
Retriever: HD 10; AC -2 [21]; Atk 4 claws (2d6) and bite (1d8) and
eye ray; Move 18; Save 5; AL Chaos; CL/XP 13/2300; Special: Eye rays
(10d6 fire ray, 10d6 cold ray, 10d6 bolt of lightning, or petrification),
infallibly track targets, regenerate 2 hp/round.

Thundershrike
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 13
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (3d6), 1 bite (3d12)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Spell-like abilities
Move: 3/30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

Thundershrikes are majestic birds, 20 feet tall with a wingspan that
reaches about 40 feet. Coloration varies from black to brown to gray
with beak color ranging from gold to white (though white-beaked
thundershrikes are extremely rare). The bird can cast control winds at
will. Twice per day, the eagle-like raptor can create a lightning bolt. Once
per day, it can cast control weather.

Sturm, Storm Giant: HD 15+5; AC 1[18]; Atk 1 weapon (6d6);
Move 15; Save 3; CL/XP 16/3200; Special: Throw boulders,
control weather.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sturm and Drang
Black clouds roll across the land, the storm dropping low tendrils
toward the earth. Thick columns of twisting winds bob and weave
through the gray sky, none quite reaching the ground – yet. A gray mist
of rain pummels the muddy earth, the sheets of rain so thick they obscure
the trees whipping in the gale.
Striding through the destruction is a giant, the horns on his helmet
nearly touching the low-hanging clouds. His beard crackles with a rime
of sparking energy from the storm, and the massive battle axe thrown
over his shoulder draws the lightning in arcing, popping strikes. From the
delight on his face, he's reveling in the fierce storm.
Sturm the Lightning Bringer walks in the magnificent chaos, taking it
all in. Anyone attacking the giant, however, soon finds he's not alone.
His pet thundershrike Drang is also enjoying the deadly winds and
savage lightning, but inside the thunderhead. She sweeps down out of the
blackness at Sturm's call to defend her master.

Tick, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Blood drain, disease
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Giant ticks appear as 3-foot long ticks. They are otherwise similar to
normal ticks. They attack by dropping on their prey from above and
stabbing with a hollow mouth tube. If subjected to fire or immersed in
water, a giant tick detaches from its victim.
If a giant tick hits with a bite attack, it latches onto the opponent's body.
The giant tick holds on with great tenacity. An attached giant tick can be
struck with a weapon or pulled away with a grapple attack.
A giant tick drains blood, dealing 1d8 points of damage in any round
when it begins its turn attached to a victim. Once it has dealt 12 points of
damage, it detaches and crawls off to digest the meal. If its victim dies
before the giant tick's appetite has been sated, the giant tick detaches and
seeks a new target.
Fifty percent of all giant ticks carry and deliver a fever with a bite attack.
Roll individually for each giant tick in the cluster or nest. The fever takes
1d3 days to incubate and 1d6 points of strength damage each day that a
saving throw is failed. If a victim's strength is reduced to 0, they die. If
they succeed at two daily saving throws in a row, they shake off the fever.

Credit: The Giant Tick originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Ticklish
In the midst of an cork oak forest there is a massive cave mouth, 25
feet tall and 30 feet wide. The cave is carved into the side of a low,
weathered mountain covered with thick grasses and blackberry bushes.
The cave is inhabited by a giant bear that stands 15 feet tall at shoulder.
The bear, called King of the Forest by the local druids, spends most of
its time hibernating. Every 30 years the great beast awakens, devours the
blackberries on the mountain, tops them off with a few dozen woodland
creatures (and any hunters unlucky enough to be nearby) and then retires
to its cave.
The chances of it being awake when adventurers come to call is minor.
The great beast is fairly helpless while asleep, but the surrounding woods
are home to a cluster of 1d4+2 giant ticks that are happy to attack anything
that might threaten their regular meal. Attacks on the bear awaken it, but
it remains groggy for 2 rounds. The giant bear has 12 Hit Dice and its
attack deal triple normal damage for a brown bear.

Time Flayer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 13
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d8+3)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Temporal displacement, +1 magic weapons to hit,
bend reality, time jaunt
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3,200

Time flayers appear as shimmering white humanoids with eyes of
sparkling fire. Their long, thin arms end in relatively humanoid hands and
their legs end in humanoid feet. They move with an elegant grace, almost
as though they were floating inches above the ground. With a touch, a
time flayer can send an opponent a few seconds into the future. If the
opponent fails a save, he vanishes for 1d4 rounds. The time flayer can use
its temporal displacement ability three times per day. A time flayer can
also fold the dimensional space around itself to hide its true location from
attackers (50% chance of missing). A time flayer can slip through the time
stream and appear somewhere else (as per the teleport spell).

The Party Never Ends
Tarkin Tower is crumbling into ruin, the top half of the tower open to
the elements. Weeds grow rampant around the stone base, and animals
disappear into the piles of fallen stone. A rotting drawbridge crosses a dry
moat. The portcullis is down, but gaping holes have rusted through it. Just
inside the stone entry, a line of checkerboard tiles runs from wall to wall.
Anyone crossing the tiles vanishes to those standing outside the castle.
The person stepping across the checkboard pattern steps from ruin
into opulence. The interior of the tower is grand and complete, and a
magnificent party is still going on. Women sway across the floor, their
gowns lavish and decorated with jewels. Men stand in groups, talking
quietly. A banquet table is filled with a large ice sculpture of a swan sitting
among roast pig, crepes, bowls of fruit and pitchers of sweet wine. There
are about 50 people in the room.
If a PC crosses the tiles and appears, the party stops, and the revelers
rush to introduce themselves. They are from all over, although a few
claim to be from kingdoms that fell into ruin years ago. Many ask for
the latest news, while others bring food for the hungry guest. Succulent
grapes are offered to the PC as well as suckled ham and peach cobbler.
Others push the PC toward a throne set on a low dais at the front of the
room. It is covered in plush velvet pillows. Red curtains rise 30 feet to the
ceiling behind the throne.
A time flayer appeared in the tower nearly 100 years ago during a grand
celebration. Its unexpected arrival set off a host of protection spells that
warped time inside the ballroom. The time flayer and the revelers are
stuck in a time loop that keeps them from aging, but won’t let any escape
the ballroom. PCs who stay realize that the food is never replaced, the ice
sculpture never melts, and the sun never rises through the windows. The
open doors and windows are like solid walls to anyone trying to leave the
ballroom.
The revelers and the time flayer have an understanding of sorts. It won’t
kill all of them if they sacrifice one person every year to the creature. The
guests draw straws every year, and the loser is forced into the throne for
the time flayer to claim. The time flayer lairs in the curtained off area
behind the throne.
The revelers eagerly try to get the PC into the chair to put off their
lottery another year. If the time flayer is slain, the time loop rights itself
and releases everyone in the ballroom.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Tombstone Fairy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d2)
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Spell resistance 20%, danse macabre, spells
Move: 6
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Tombstone fairies are wicked little creature dressed in the garb of an
undertaker and resembling a tiny gargoyle. They have tiny black closeset eyes, and their skin is slate gray. Tombstone fairies are wicked beings
that dwell within graveyards, raising murderers and evil heroes from the
dead to go out and continue their deadly work. They often demand some
form of repayment for the raising of such beings, keeping the creature's
funeral shroud as a bargaining chip. This payment could range from
magical or monetary treasures, the murder of a specific enemy and so
on. Failure to make payment within 30 days usually results in the raised
individual dying again. Upon payment, the formerly dead is given their
shroud and is free to go about committing whatever foul deeds they wish.
A tombstone fairy stands about 3 feet tall and weighs around 35 pounds.
Its skin is always slate gray and its hair is either dark brown or black. Its
eyes are always black. Once per night, a tombstone fairy can invoke a
ritual (danse macabre) to raise any evil creature from the dead. The ritual
takes 10 minutes to perform and the target cannot have been dead longer
than one day per HD of the tombstone fairy. During the ritual, a portion
of the target's soul transfers to its funeral shroud or cloth. The tombstone
fairy often retains this shroud so as to force compliance from the returned
target. A tombstone fairy can have only one funeral shroud (containing
a target's soul) in its possession at one time. A tombstone fairy can cast
detect evil, dispel magic, protection from evil thrice per day and can use
ESP at will. Once per day it can cast suggestion.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Hang Him High . . . Again
A weather-beaten gallows sits in the small town of Sod, with nearly
seven severed ropes dangling from the center beam. A pile of seven
bodies lie beneath the scaffold. Each has been hanged and the body cut
down to rot beneath the gallows.
Sitting on the gallows is a gaunt man wearing a dusty black cloak
wrapped around his body. A cut noose hangs loose around his neck. A
black blade with a wickedly serrated edge is stuck into the wood in front
of him. A young woman stands behind the man, her hands bound in front
of her and a noose resting around her neck. She begs for her life.
Garn the Grievous killed all people who condemned him and dumped
their bodies beneath the instrument of his death. The remaining townsfolk
now cater to the evil man's whims. To disobey him is to join the rotting
bodies under the gallows. Garn was hanged three days ago, but returned
that night to seek his revenge. Every day, he randomly selects and hangs
one townsperson. No one knows how the killer returned from the dead.
Near the unmarked grave where the killer's body was dumped lives a
miserable tombstone fairy named Grim. The fey took a liking to Garn
immediately, and raised the killer from the dead. If PCs slay Garn again,
Grim seeks out the body and resurrects him that same night. The only way
to stop Hanley returning to claim more townsfolk is to destroy Hanley's
cloak, which the fairy possesses in a tiny grotto near the cemetery. The
cloak is imbued with a portion of the killer's soul. Garn dies forever if the
cloak is destroyed.

Transposer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  2 slams (1d6 plus transposition)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Transposition, change self
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A transposer looks like a featureless humanoid whose arms end in
large sucker-like membranes. Transposers are thought to be of an alien
culture; how they came to the Material Plane remains a mystery to sages.
Most transposers avoid contact with sentient races, preferring to live
in seclusion among their own kind. Transposers speak their own alien
tongue and a few that have spent time on the Material Plane speak the
common tongue as well.
When it first encounters potential prey, a transposer takes the shape of
a creature of the same race as its potential prey. Once its prey is in range,
the transposer lashes out with its arms. Once it transposes a target, it
pummels it relentlessly with its arms.
An opponent hit by a transposer's slam attack becomes linked (i.e.
transposed) to it by an invisible and undetectable field of energy for 1 hour
if it fails a saving throw. A transposer can have a number of opponents
equal to its HD linked to it at one time. An opponent can be linked to more
than one transposer (if it fails its save against each transposer's attack).
When a linked opponent attacks a transposer it is linked to, the creature
gains hp equal to the damage the attack would normally deal, and
the attacker takes the damage. Other opponents linked to that transposer
are unharmed. A transposer can gain up to the maximum hp
allowed by its Hit Dice (i.e. HD x 8). It cannot gain bonus or temporary
hp from this ability.

Curative magic cast on a transposer by a transposed opponent damages
the creature by the amount it would normally heal, and heals a like
amount of damage on the one who cast the spell. (Other linked creatures
are unaffected.) Curative magic cast on a transposed opponent works
normally but does not heal or harm a linked transposer. Curative magic
cast on a transposer by a non-linked opponent functions normally.
Opponents not linked to the transposer can attack and affect the creature
normally.

Credit: The Transposer originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Someone Call the Men in Black
Three days after a clutch of asteroids struck the fields of a backwater
village, a transposer stalks the area. The transposer seeks a strange,
metallic helm that was found by a peasant in the smoldering woods near
the site of the strike. The helm is precious to the creature, but its ultimate
workings are unknown (i.e. it’ll do whatever the Referee needs or wants
it to do).
The peasant traded it to a traveling merchant for a few sacks of corn.
The merchant is on his way to give it as a gift to the ruler of neighboring
kingdom. The transposer has already tracked the peasant down and killed
him in his lonely cottage. It has taken the peasant's form and is now
looking for information on the man who received the helm.

Trapper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  Buffet (1d8+1)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Smother, resistance to edged or piercing weapons
(50%), resistance to cold and fire (50%), surprise on 1-3 on
1d6
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 14/2600

A trapper resembles a manta ray with brownish-gray flesh turning lighter
on its underside. No discernible eyes or appendages can be seen. Trappers
are thought to be distant relatives of the lurker above (see that entry).
Unlike their relatives, however, trappers mimic the floor of a building,
dungeon, or other structure. By manipulating their body structure while
covering the floor, trappers can form a box that resembles a small trunk or
chest. This is usually enough to lure would-be-adventurers to their doom.
A trapper waits until its prey is almost centered on its body near the
“trunk” or “chest” before it strikes. It then quickly folds and wraps its
body around its unsuspecting prey attempting to smother and squeeze it
until it is dead.
A trapper can try to wrap a creature in its body as an attack. If
successful, it establishes a hold and deals buffet damage each round the
hold is maintained. Further, a grappled opponent must hold its breath (2
rounds per point of constitution) or suffocate. After this period of time,
the character must make a saving throw in order to continue holding
her breath. When the character fails one of these saving throws, she
suffocates.
Attacks that hit an engulfing trapper deal half their damage to the
monster and half to the trapped victim.

Credit: The Trapper originally appeared in the Strategic Review #5 (© TSR/
Wizards of the Coast, 1975) and later in the First Edition Monster Manual (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Answer Me These Questions Three
You come to a crossroads in a dungeon. The crossroads is composed of
a chamber of red stone. The chamber measures 15 feet wide and long with
an 8-foot ceiling. The center of the chamber (10 feet x 10 feet) is sunken
about five feet below the rest of the chamber. On each wall of the upper
chamber there is a straight passage leading away to other adventures.
Each of these passages is closed by a door that looks like a stained glass
window. Each window appears to show events in the romance of a learned
duchess and a scribe.
In the sunken portion of the chamber there is a small platform holding
an amethyst-colored lyre. In skilled hands, the amethyst lyre produces
lovely music that has as a side effect the ability to animate images (on
tapestries, stained glass windows, bas-relief, etc), allowing the musician
to ask these objects (i.e. if only these walls could speak) three questions.
Once an object has been asked these three questions, it can never be
questioned again.
This treasure is guarded by a trapper mimicing the form of the sunken
floor.

Treant, Lightning
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 strikes (2d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: magical powers, electric healing, immune to
electricity, resists fire
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A lightning treant is an animated, yet dead, mosscovered tree. Its bark is darkened with age and no
leaves appear on its branches. At will, a lightning treant
can create faerie fire, and three times per day, it can cast
lightning bolt. Any attack that deals electrical damage
heals 3 hp per spell level. The hardened bark of a
lightning treant resists fire, so that the creature takes half damage
from flames.

The Tree House
The arch-druid Gorebourne lives in the Tanglethorn Thicket.
Gorebourne (who is chaotic toward civilization and also
happens to be infected with lycanthropy) has enslaved a
lightning treant to entertain his youngsters. He attached a
stout tree house high in the lightning treant's upper branches.
He young sons ride the treant through the woods, wreaking
havoc on all who cross their path. His sons respect nature,
but have inherited their father's disdain for civilization.
They attack and destroy any settlements that arise too close
to the Tanglethorn Thicket. If given warning, the treant
poses as a tree while the two boys taunt travelers. They
have amassed a stockpile of rotten fruit, bags of feces,
chestnut burs and bladders of putrid fish oil to throw at
passers-by. Other than taunting PCs, the boys are too young
to have any combat experience.

Copyright Notice: Author Casey Christofferson.

Tri-Flower Frond
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  4 tendrils (1d3 plus sleep)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Acid, fluid drain, sleep, camouflage, surprise on a
roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 0
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A tri-flower frond has stalks 5 to 8 feet tall. It is deep green with trumpetshaped flowers of red, yellow, and orange topping its stalks. Tri-flower
fronds are carnivorous plants found in warm (and occasionally temperate)
forests. They are immobile creatures that reproduce by releasing seeds
into the air and allowing either the wind (or creatures who happen to
come into contact with them) to carry them wherever they go. Seeds take
root once they touch the ground, and within a few months, a new triflower frond appears. These creatures are generally most active during the
day and dine on fresh meat, having no preference as to the source.
A tri-flower frond attacks by firing a number of tendrils from its orange
flower. The creature has 4 tendrils, plus 1 per Hit Dice above 3. A fired
tendril causes an opponent struck to fall into a deep, coma-like sleep if
it fails a saving throw. This effect is similar to a sleep spell, except it can
affect a creature of any Hit Dice and slapping or attacking an affected
creature does not wake it. A slept creature awakens on its own after 1d4
hours. A dispel magic spell ends the sleep effect.
If a tri-flower frond sleeps a victim, it pulls the opponent close and
droops over it, allowing its yellow bloom to drip a shower of caustic acid
(1d6 damage) on the sleeping victim while it inserts a needle-like tendril
from its red bloom into the victim's body and drains fluids.
Against a sleeping or helpless foe, a tri-flower frond releases a needlesharp tendril from its red bloom that pierces the opponent and drains its
body fluids. This deals 1d4 points of constitution damage each round. At
0 constitution, a victim dies.

Credit: The Tri-Flower Frond originally appeared in the First Edition module
S3 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1980) and
later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Flowers of the Triskelion
In the midst of a steamy rain forest there is a sort of labyrinth constructed
of white stone and surrounded by a small lake of still water. The labyrinth
is actually in the form of a triskelion. It has three entrances, tall, narrow
doors of polished white wood at each foot of the triskelion. The walls,
inside and outside, are scupulously clean.
At the center of the triskelion, where the three passages meet, there is a
shrine built to honor Tricrucia, the goddess of forked passages. Tricrucia
appears as a woman with three arms and three legs. In one of her hands
she holds a military fork. This particular state, carved from the same white
stone as the labyrinth, stands in the middle of a patch of three tri-flower
fronds. Although obscured by the dangerous foliage, one of the idol's
feet rests upon a golden sphere. The sphere cannot be removed without
damaging it, leaving it worth about 50 gp. Those who do not molest the
sphere, and instead place their foreheads against it while whispering a
prayer to the strange goddess receive the equivalent of a find the path
spell the next three times they come to an underground crossroads.
The pixies and sprites of the forest come to the shrine each day at
midnight to clean the labyrinth, collect corpses (they are thrown into
the lake for the fish) and their equipment (it is retained by the fairies as
treasure) and tend the tri-flower fronds. The carnivorous plants regard
the fairies as friends and do not harm them. If they discover the plants
dead and the idol molested, they will hunt down the profaners and exact
revenge.

Troblin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d6), or weapon (1d6) and
bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Regenerates 2 hp/round, mutation
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

This hideous humanoid creature is a twisted amalgamation of extra limbs,
thickened hide, and protruding growths.

A troblin is a twisted creature, born of the union of a troll and a goblin.
In general, troblins stand 5 feet tall, with crooked noses, long arms and
legs, and large flapping feet. A troblin shares in the characteristics of both
its parents, resembling a very tall goblin with troll-like facial features.
Its skin is blotched in shades of green, grey, and dull yellow. Its eyes range
from pale red to an ochre color. Troblins dress in drab-colored clothing and
furs made from the hides of animals. Troblins often suffer hideous mutations
after they regenerate as their body warps into inexplicable shapes.

Troblin Mutations Each troblin has the potential to possess 1d2 random mutations brought
about by its bizarre regeneration. Roll on the table below for each
mutation.

======= ========================================================================
d20     Mutation
======= ========================================================================
1-2     Dual forearm; claw damage increased (1d6)
3-4     Dual foreleg; move increases by 3
5-6     Massive scarring; armor increases -1[+1]
7       Multiple muscles; damage bonus to claw attack (1d8)
8       Shortened tendons; move increases by 9
9       Redundant vital organs; +2 hp per HD
10      Third leg; move increases by 6
11      Two arms on one side; gains an additional claw attack
12      Two heads; never surprised
13-20   No mutation
======= ========================================================================

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Eye of the Beholder
A small figure moves among the trees, being careful to stay just
outside the flickering light of campfires. The creature barely four feet
tall and wears a dark wool robe cloak that covers it from head to foot.
The creature hides its face behind a delicate porcelain mask. The mask is
expressionless, just a painted-on mouth set beneath two small holes for
the creature's eyes. Fine curls of dark paint wend down the mask's cheeks
like tears. The creature shuffles through the underbrush, dragging one leg
miserably. One misshapen hand stretches forth, holding a bright red apple
in a gloved hand. The other hand is palm up, expecting payment.
Errax Boneshiver, a misshapen troblin, is a lonely creature who just
wants to make friends. Unfortunately, his deformities – the left side of
his face is a mass of scar tissue, and he drags a useless third leg that
extends backward from behind his right knee – mark him as an outcast.
Errax lives in a small lean-to in the forest, where he tends a small apple
orchard. The trees are hearty and produce bright red, delicious apples.
Errax's secret? He mixes a little of his sweat and blood into a smelly
fertilizer he sprays on the trees and their fruit each morning.
Unknown to Errax, the apples are mutating under his ministrations. Any
PC eating one of the fruit must save or suffer a troblin mutation from the
“special brew” used to fertilize the apples. A PC might grow a third arm
over the next week, or suffer intense scarring after his next fight. Roll on
the troblin mutation chart or create your own deformity to inflict on the
unlucky PC.

Troll, Cave
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Rend, regenerate 2 hp/round, haste, spider climb
Move: 24
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

This ugly humanoid appears to be about 6 feet tall. Its leathery skin is
blackish-gray and its eyes are yellow. It has long, upright ears, almost
elven in nature. Its arms and legs are long and slender and end in wickedlooking claws.
Cave trolls are smaller cousins of the normal troll and are found in
all types of subterranean realms. They are as deadly, or more so, than
their larger brethren. Cave trolls have the same voracious appetite of the
normal troll and sustain themselves on whatever they can find in their
underground realms. Cave trolls have blackish-gray hides and yellow
eyes.
Cave trolls stand 6 feet tall and weigh 300 pounds. They do not walk
with the same hunched gait of their larger relatives. They stand upright
and move with blinding speed. They speak the language of trolls.
Cave trolls rarely venture to the surface world, preferring the security
and tranquility of the darkness they inhabit. If extremely hungry or if
food is scarce, however, a cave troll ventures to the surface and attacks
whatever it finds near its lair.
Cave trolls often use deception when they first encounter prey, especially
intelligent prey. Their troll heritage often leads to the misconception that
they are slow in combat, which they gladly allow their opponents to
believe — until the cave troll strikes or moves. Only then is the ruse
negated and the true nature of the troll revealed. Cave trolls attack by
grabbing and rending an opponent. If a cave troll hits with both claw
attacks, it latches onto the opponent's body and tears the flesh. This attack
automatically deals an additional 2d4 points of damage.
A cave troll is affected by permanent haste and spider climb effects. The
haste ability can be dispelled, but the spider climb cannot.
Fire and acid deal normal damage to a cave troll. If a cave troll loses
a limb or body part, the lost portion grows back in 3d6 minutes. The
creature can reattach the severed member instantly by holding it to the
stump.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson.

Gold Was the Worst of It
You enter a chamber that measures 30 feet long and 15 feet wide, with
a 10-foot high ceiling. The chamber is lined with reddish-brown bricks in
a fishbone pattern. Every three feet, running down the length of the walls
at chest height to a human are black ceramic disks. There are 12 disks in
all, 6 on each wall, they are always set facing one another. The disks are
flat and unadorned and measure about 2 feet in diameter. Set in the floor
there is an iron hatch, the only exit from the room besides the entrance.
Coursing between each set of disks is what looks like a swarm of
shadowy particles. Touching this stream of particles causes 1d4 points of
damage and causes the body part to throb - throbbing hands cannot hold
anything for 1 hour, while a throbbing foot reduces a person's movement
rate by half for one hour. Mirrors do not reflect the particles and nothing
short of lead blocks them at all. If damaged (AC 1 [18], 45 hp) or blocked
by lead (see below), the particle stream ceases and a cave troll appears
in its place. The trolls fight until killed, disappearing into the flow of
particles if it flow is returned to normal.
If the iron hatch is opened, the shadow particles immediately change
direction, running from the disks (on both sides) and into the revealed
shaft. Each stream that hits a person causes damage as described above.
The shaft leads into a small chamber (10 feet wide and long, 7 feet tall)
that contains another black disk, this one floating in mid-air and spinning
like a coin. If touched and any particle flows are still active above, the
person immediately disappears and replaces one of the cave trolls in the
particle flow, the troll appearing in the chamber with the floating disk.
If no flows continue, the disk throbs with shadowy energy, causing
the damage described above each round one is in the room with it. If
destroyed, the release of energy causes 4d4 points of damage to all in the
room and causes all metal in the room to change to gold.

Troll, Flame-Spawned
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6+3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4 +1d6 fire), 1 bite (1d8 + 1d6 fire)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Fiery, regenerates, immune to fire, vulnerable
to acid and cold
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

Flame-spawned trolls look like normal trolls, but with fire dancing around
their reddish-tinged skin. Flamespawned trolls regenerate 3 hp per round. The
only way to utterly kill a troll is to submerse it in acid or freeze it.
Flame-spawned trolls can even regrow lopped-off heads and limbs. Flame-spawned
trolls take double damage from acid and cold, and do not regenerate such
damage.

Troll God
A 15-foot-diameter ball of fire dominates this
area. It appears as if a fireball spell failed to
detonate and remains in a permanent suspended
state. The fireball produces heat and damage
if touched but does not explode. It remains in
the room and never burns out.
A group of trolls have adopted this as a holy
site and worship at the fire. The trolls bring
regular sacrifices to the fireball and have even
made up an elaborate (for a troll) religion
based on the fireball. They have built a “safety
wall” of bones to signify the danger area.
The ball of fire conceals Gulumpus, a flamespawned troll who is the self-proclaimed troll
god.
Long ago, the misfired spell transformed
Gulumpus into his current state. Since then,
Gulumpus rules this small clan with fear
and brute force. Normally, 2d4 trolls tend to
Gulumpuses’ needs. The center of the fireball
holds a molten pool of miscellaneous coins
given to the troll god. The mound of slag is worth
7,000 gp if cooled and the metals separated. It
weighs 300 pounds and has a mixture of iron and
other metals infused within the mass.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Troll, Ice
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: +1 or better weapon to hit, immunity to cold,
double damage from fire, regenerate 2 hp/round,
vulnerability to slashing weapons
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Ice trolls are relatives of normal trolls, but are decidedly more cunning,
ruthless, evil, and despicable. They make their homes in very cold
climates, always near a pool of water (either natural or troll-made). The
strongest (and sometimes most intelligent) member of a band is usually
the leader. They have semitransparent flesh of light blue and cold, stark
white eyes.
Ice trolls savor the taste of human flesh and construct their lairs near
civilized areas where humans are plentiful. Ice trolls often set traps for
humans and either devours them immediately or captures them and
carries them back to their lair. Captured humans are caged and fattened
up before they are eaten.
An ice troll stands about 8 feet tall and weighs 450 pounds. Ice trolls do
not possess any body hair. They speak the language of trolls.
If an ice troll hits with both claw attacks, it latches onto the opponent's
body and tears the flesh for an additional 2d6 points of damage.
If an opponent rolls a natural 20 with a slashing weapon against an ice
troll, the ice troll must succeed on a saving throw or lose a limb (roll
1d6: 1-3 arm, 4-6 leg; 50% chance of either right or left). An ice troll that
loses a leg falls to the ground, but can continue moving at one-half speed.
Severed limbs cannot attack but move at a speed of 30 feet toward the
nearest source of water or ice.
Fire and acid deal normal damage to an ice troll. If an ice troll loses a
limb or body part, the lost portion grows back in 2d6 minutes so long as
both the ice troll and lost body part are within 30 feet of each other and
are both in contact with ice or water. The creature can reattach the severed
member instantly by holding it to the stump, but only if the severed
member has been in contact with ice or water for at least 1 round.

Credit: The Ice Troll originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Russell
Cole.

Sorceress on Ice
Your adventures take you into a cave of ice. The cave measures 30 feet
wide and 40 feet long with a ceiling 20 feet high in the center. The walls
and ice pillars in the room are faceted and are as reflective as mirrors. The
cave is inhabited by a band of 1d4+2 ice trolls. The cave is very unstable,
and loud noises or shocks (such as from fireballs or lightning bolts) have
a 1 in 6 chance of causing giant icicles to fall from the ceiling. Each
round the icecicles fall, roll an attack against each creature in the cavern
as though from a 3 HD monster. A successful hit indicated 1d6 points of
damage.
A small tunnel, for all intents and purposes a secret passage due to the
reflective nature of its surroundings, leads to a deeper ice cave. This ice
cave holds the frozen corpse of a sorceress wrapped in an ermine cloak
and wearing a crimson dress and fur-lined boots. The corpse's face is
twisted in a look of hopelessness. There is a 1 in 6 chance the corpse's
spirit still haunts the chamber as a spectre. In her frozen hand there is a
silver flute. When blown, the flute summons a murder of ravens from
mid-air. The ravens remain for 10 rounds before disappearing.

Troll, Rock
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Rend, regenerate 3 hp/round, vulnerability to
sunlight
Move: 12/9 (burrowing)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

A rock troll stands nearly twice as tall as a normal man. Its hide is earthcolored and its hair is dark. Its eyes are deep brown. The creature's arms
and legs are long and thin and end in sharpened talons. Its feet end in
three-toed feet.
Rock trolls are relatives of the normal troll and make their lairs deep
within the subterranean realms of the earth. Most underground creatures
avoid rock trolls, as they are completely malign and evil, attacking any
living creature, especially when hungry. They are quite fond of human
and halfling flesh. Unlike common trolls, rock trolls cannot regenerate
lost limbs, though they do possess the ability to quickly heal damage. A
rock troll regenerates damage only if it is underground and touching dirt
or earth.
Rock trolls are 10 feet tall and weigh about 600 pounds. They resemble
their smaller relatives in most respects. The rock troll's hide is stone gray
or brown, its hair is black or brown, and its eyes are dull brown. Rock
trolls peak the language of trolls.
If a rock troll hits with both claw attacks, it latches onto the opponent's
body and tears the flesh. This attack automatically deals an additional 2d6
points of damage.
A rock troll exposed to sunlight (not merely a light spell) is instantly
turned to stone (as if by a flesh to stone spell) in the next round if its fails
a saving throw. This effect is permanent, but can be dispelled if the rock
troll is removed from the source of the sunlight and stone to flesh is cast
on it. A rock troll must make a new saving throw each round it remains
in sunlight.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Tuscadero Hideaway
A gang of 1d3+1 rock trolls has made a camp for itself in a large cavern
with walls that appear to drip with fresh blood. The “blood” is actually
a harmless organism related to green slime. Although slightly acidic, the
slime feeds only on bacteria plucked from the air or from the surface of
the damp stone.

The trolls have a few palettes of soiled furs and pelts and a treasure of
3,400 sp and 700 gp tucked underneath them. Although most of the beasts
fight with sticks and stones, the largest owns a +1 halberd taken from an
errant knight.

On the far eastern end of the cavern, there is a steep slope that leads to
a sandy cavern filled with cracked and splintered bones. This cavern is
inhabited by an undead ooze. Beyond this cavern there is an old hiding
place once used by a notorious band of halfling highwaymen called the
Tuscaderos. The halflings constructed a secret entrance that leads into a
small, tunnel-like passage. They once hung their equipment and bags of
treasure from hooks on the walls of the tunnel, which is about 30 feet
long and runs at a slight curve. The only treasure yet remaining in the
tunnel is a silver hip flask holding a very potent sleeping potion (imbiber
sleeps a minimum of 24 hours and has strange nightmares the entire time,
nightmares he believes are prophetic).

Troll, Swamp
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6), bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Swamp dependent, surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Swamp trolls are large, stocky, dark gray or brown hunched humanoids
with large, upward-curving fangs jutting from their lower jaws. Their
flesh is slick and slimy like moss. Swamp trolls make their lairs
deep in swampland and marshes away from more settled areas,
but not far enough away where they cannot hunt humans if
game and other food runs scarce in the swamps.
Swamp trolls are 7-foot tall hunched humanoids and
weigh about 400 pounds. Swamp trolls speak the language
of trolls.
Swamp trolls keep their bodies covered in a thick
coating of mud and swamp water. Without such a coating,
they eventually suffocate. They can survive away from
their murky home for 10 hours. After that, they suffocate.

Troblin Feast
In the midst of a deep marsh of cool, black water, white
and yellow water lillies and cattails there is a ruin of narrow
raised walks constructed of black, porous stone. These stone
walkways are crumbling in spots and seem to lead to a central
platform marked by a dozen basalt pillars in various states of decay. On
the night of each new moon, a gang of 1d4+4 swamp trolls gathers at
this place for a gruesome feast.
The central platform is actually a pit carved from a single piece of
basalt, and thus fairly water tight (though it is covered with a sheen of
water, various mosses and lichens and the odd jelly or ooze. The pit is
about 10 feet deep and 40 feet in diameter, with gently sloping walls.
At each new moon, the trolls of the swamp gather here with
dozens of troblin captives taken in the surrounding marshes and
hills. The troblins are kept in crude wooden cages, which
are piled in the middle of the pit. At the proper moment,
one swamp troll releases the troblins, who quickly try
to scurry away. The gathered swamp trolls waste no
time in falling upon the creatures, tearing away their
limbs and wolfing them down. The horribly injured
creatures are allowed to writhe about in pain, still
desperately trying to escape. Those that escape into
the swamp are granted their freedom. Those that do
not, but still live, are re-caged and kept for the next
midnight feast.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Troll, Two-Headed
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 weapons (1d10) or 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Rend, regenerate 1 hp/round, only surprised on roll
of 1 on 1d8
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1700

The two-headed troll is thought to be the hideous offspring of an ettin
and female troll. Sages contend that no other explanation is possible
concerning this monster. Two-headed trolls prefer to make their lairs
underground and away from civilization. Although believed to be the
offspring of an ettin and troll, they do not associate with the former, but
are often found leading the latter during raids or wars.

A two-headed troll stands about 10 feet tall and weighs about 2,000
pounds. Its hide is mottled green or gray, and its facial features resemble
that of a standard troll. Two-headed trolls typically dress in rags or
tattered clothes or even battered and rusted armor on occasion. Their legs
end in three-toed feet, and their powerful arms end in sharpened claws.
The two-headed troll has the slow moving gait of the normal troll, but
does not walk hunched over.

Two-headed trolls speak the language of trolls and the language of
ettins.

If a two-headed troll hits with both of its claw attacks, it latches onto
the opponent's body and tears the flesh for an additional 2d6 points of
damage.

A two-headed troll heals 1 point of damage each round so long as it has
at least 1 hit point. It cannot regenerate limbs.

Credit: The Two-Headed Troll originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Oliver
Charles MacDonald.

Troll Blood Soup
A deep pit in a dungeon is occupied by a two-headed troll. The pit is
20 feet in diameter and the ceiling is 30 feet high. The pit is entered via
two tunnels set about 10 feet above the floor of the pit. The troll's leg is
chained to the floor by a thick, iron chain. Four shadowy alcoves are set
into the walls about 15 feet above the floor of the pit, two on either side
of the entrance/exit tunnels.
The troll is in bad shape, currently possessing about 15 hp.
Creatures hidden in the alcoves are casting iron darts at the two-headed
troll, making sure they do not kill the beast. The troll's ichor runs onto the
floor and into little channels, then drains and then into a cauldron a level
below. This blood is collected by four shamans and used in their magic.
In each alcove there is a shaman of the underworld tribes - an orc, a
hobgoblin, a bugbear and a goblin. Each alcove holds a secret door to
a spiral stair that leads into the cauldron chamber about 10 feet below.
Each shaman is accompanied by a single bodyguard with +2 HD and
five normal members of their tribes in the cauldron chamber. From the
cauldron chamber there are passages that lead into the remainder of the
dungeon.

Common Tsathar
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Weapon (1d8) and bite (1d4); or 2 claws (1d6) and
bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Leap, summon hydrodaemon amphibious, implant, slimy
Move: 12/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 3/60

A tsathar (pronounced “suh-Thar”) resembles an upright, humanoid frog with
gray flesh and reddish-gold eyes. Its humanoid arms end in wicked claws.
Tsathar have little contact with surface-dwelling races, preferring to make
their lairs deep underground or in dark swamps. When they lair above ground,
they are nocturnal. Some few surface-dwelling tsathar have joined cults of
assassins. Though cults and gods vary in makeup and worship, nearly all tsathar
worship the foul, slime-covered demon-god Tsathogga.

Abrupt exposure to bright light (such as sunlight or a light spell) blinds
tsathars for 1 round.

Because tsathar continuously cover themselves with muck and slime, they
are difficult to grapple. Webs, magic or otherwise, do not affect tsathar, and they
usually can wriggle free from most other forms of confinement.

A typical tsathar stands 6 feet tall and weighs about 300 pounds. Tsathar
speak their own strange, guttural language and the eldritch speech of demons.
Tsathar prefer to use short, barbed spears and curved daggers in combat. They
sometimes employ nets as well. They charge into combat with maniacal fury,
and rarely use elaborate tactics, unless a scourge or priest is present to control
them. They favor leather armor crafted from the hides of the frogs they breed.
Priests favor the curved dagger in battle.

Tsathar can leap up to 30 feet horizontally (10 feet vertically) and make an
attack in the same round. Tsathar wearing armor heavier than ring armor cannot
use this ability.

A tsathar with at least five levels of cleric can, once per day, attempt to
summon a hydrodaemon with a 40% chance of success. Tsathar scourges do
not possess this ability.

Tsathar are sexless, reproducing by injecting eggs into living hosts. An egg
can be implanted only into an unconscious or restrained host. Giant frogs, bred
for this very purpose, are the most common host. Accompanying the egg is an
anaesthetizing poison that causes the host to fall unconscious for the two-week
gestation period of the egg unless the host succeeds on a saving throw. If the
save succeeds, the host remains conscious, but is violently ill (-10 penalty to
hit and save) 24 hours before the eggs hatch. When the eggs mature, the young
tsathar emerge from the host, killing it in the process. A cure disease spell rids
the victim of the eggs.

Tsathars as Characters A tsathar can advance as a fighter (3rd level maximum, 4th level with a
strength of 13+) or cleric (5th level maximum, 6th level with a wisdom
of 13+) or as multi-classed cleric/fighters if they have both a strength and
wisdom score of 13+.

Credit: The Tsathar first appeared in the Necromancer Games adventure D1 Tomb
of Abysthor (©2001, Clark Peterson and Bill Webb, Necromancer Games, Inc.) as
servants of the demonic frog god Tsathogga.

Copyright Notice: Authors Clark Peterson, Bill Webb, and Scott Greene.


Tsathar Scourge
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Weapon (1d8) and bite (1d4); or 2 claws (1d6) and
bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Leap, amphibious, implant slimy
Move: 12/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 5/240

Tsathar scourges are special tsathar in charge of breeding the dangerous “killer”
frogs. They wear a badge of station that indicates their control over the various
beasts. All frogs bred by the tsathar obey scourges. Tsathar scourges never
become priests and thus do not have the summoning ability of common tsathars.
Tsathar are sexless and reproduce by implanting an egg into a host, which
can be any form of living creature. Normally, creatures are captured or bred
to serve as hosts—dire rats and giant frogs being common hosts. It is said that
priests must be born of an egg implanted into a humanoid or other creature of
great intelligence.

Scourges prefer to loose their servant frogs on opponents, allowing common
tsathar soldiers to engage opponents hand-to-hand. This is not to say that they
are not able fighters, for they certainly are. They favor barbed spears, curved
daggers, and light armor such as leather or ring armor. They also often carry
nets to snare their charges or foes. If their frogs are in danger, they leap in with
their spears and attack.

Credit: The Tsathar first appeared in the Necromancer Games adventure D1 Tomb
of Abysthor (©2001, Clark Peterson and Bill Webb, Necromancer Games, Inc.) as
servants of the demonic frog god Tsathogga.

Copyright Notice: Authors Clark Peterson, Bill Webb, and Scott Greene.

It's Not Easy Being Green
A pack of 1d6+4 tsathar is holed up in a tower of white chalk set in the
middle of a noisy swamp. The tower is 15 feet in diameter and 20 feet tall.
The chaotic frog men are accompanied by 1d4+1 tsathar scourges and a
clutch of 1d4+1 giant frogs. The frog men were dispatched from their
clanhold to see to this building, a shrine to their demon god Tsathogga.
The shrine has three round doors set about 10 feet above the surface of the
mucky swamp and are barred with bronze bars.

The tower is currently under siege by a swarm of 1d10+10 giant wasps.
The wasps were spurred into action by a quasit in service to another
demon prince. The frog men are running out of food and are getting
nervous about the scourges’ ability to control their giant frogs.
The idol in the shrine is a copper idol covered in verdigris and set
with dozens of moss agates (worth about 500 gp in total). The idol is
surrounded by four stone pots filled with everlasting fires under piles of
red hot river stones. These pots are used to create a ritual steam bath, a
recreation not currently being enjoyed by the beleaguered tsathar.

Tumblespark
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: Roll-over (1d6 + 1d6 electricity)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: electrical arc, immune to electricity, insubstantial
form
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A tumblespark looks like a giant tumbleweed whose form crackles and
sparks with electricity. A tumblespark can grow to a diameter of 10 feet
or more. A tumblespark is not solid, nor is it incorporeal. It attacks by
rolling over all in its path dealing 1d6 points of damage plus 1d6 points
of electricity damage. Once every 1d4 rounds, a tumblespark can release
an arc of electricity against a single opponent within 10 feet that deals 4d6
points of damage. A successful save reduces the damage by half.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Spark of Attraction
This 50-foot-diameter circular chamber is built from black stone blocks
fitted perfectly atop one another to create smooth outer walls. Set flush
into the walls are 16 portals. Two opposite one another lead out of the
room. The rest are filled with smooth black stone that glistens like a
starless night sky.
In the center of the room is a burnished copper column rising from floor
to ceiling. Elaborate sigils are carved down the column. At waist height,
sixteen graphite buttons inlaid with silver patterns ring the metal. Each
button corresponds to the door it faces.
When a button is pressed, the copper hums and a noticeable vibration
fills the room. Sparks of lightning dance over the metal surface. The
selected door opens two rounds later, the black stone sluicing away into
nothingness to leave a black spongy void. The doors lead wherever the
Game Referee wishes.
Pushing a button has a 1 in 6 chance of releasing a tumblespark into the
chamber. The tumbling ball of energy is drawn by the energy created in
the copper column and arrives fully charged and agitated. Each successive
button raises the chance of an encounter by 1, so pressing three buttons in
a row means a 3 in 6 chance of a tumblespark arriving.

Tunnel Worm
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 7
Special: Rend armor
Move: 9/9 (burrowing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

A tunnel worm appears to be a 30-foot long sleek, black centipede
with a long segmented body and many slender legs. Its huge mandibles
are serrated and razor-sharp, and its eyes are multi-faceted. A ring of
chitinous bone rings its oversized head.
The tunnel worm is a burrowing creature related to the monstrous
centipede. It is a very aggressive predator and hunter, though it can
sustain itself by scavenging. Its preferred food is fresh, raw meat.
A typical tunnel worm is 30 feet long, but can grow to a length of 60
feet.
Tunnel worms are very aggressive and attack anything that enters their
territory. They usually wait beneath the surface of the ground and then
burrow out to surprise and attack their opponents (treat this attack as a
charge attack). A tunnel worm that has taken more than half its hp
in damage retreats to its lair unless it is cornered, in which case it fights
to the death.
If a tunnel worm hits with its bite attack, it pulls apart any armor worn
by its foe. This attack reduces the armor bonus of the armor by 1d4.
Armor with an armor bonus reduced to 0 or lower is destroyed. Creatures
not wearing armor are unaffected by this special attack.

Credit: The Tunnel Worm originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Prime or Tunnel
In a secret glade in a trackless forest there are two golden pillars standing
about 7 feet tall and 3 feet apart. The top of each pillar is concave.
Scattered around the shady clearing are nine stones, each bearing a
number from one to nine.
The golden pillars are a planar portal that is activated by placing
stones atop both pillars. If the double digit number is prime, the portal is
activated, with each prime number keyed to a different plane (Referees
should tie the numbers to the planes he or she is using in their campaign).
If a non-prime number is placed on the pillars, the portal activates and
1d4+1 tunnel worms pour into the glade.
Scratched into the ground before the pillars is “135”, a clue to the
mathematical logic involved in the portal.

Turtle, Giant Bog
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 16
Armor Class: 3 [16], 5 [14] head, flippers
Attacks: 1 bite (4d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: swallow whole
Move: 3/12 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3,200

A giant bog turtle is about 20 feet long. Its carapace is brown or dark
green and mottled with darker spots. Younger bog turtles have light
stripes ringing their shell. As they age, the stripes slowly fade. A giant
bog turtle's head, neck, and limbs are dark green or brown and leathery
to the touch. Its underbelly is always lighter and is colored light green,
gray, or pale yellow. If a bog turtle rolls a natural 20 on a bite attack, it
swallows the victim whole (6d6 damage).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Slow Chase
The raft-city of Twain's Landing lives an idyllic existence on a redwood
raft that supports wood-and-stone buildings housing nearly 300 people.
Many of the residents are born and die on the raft without ever setting foot
on dry land. The city floats around the Sin Mire's swampy waters. A giant
movable series of paddlewheels in the center of the raft-city let it when it
needs to, and giant rudders mounted on each edge of the massive square
platform direct the raft's path. A line of giant turtle shells tethered to the
city bob along in its wake.
The villagers trap the 20-foot giant turtles for food, and set the shells
out as bait to attract more of the creatures. The plan worked a little too
perfectly; a monstrous 50-foot snapping turtle now follows the village,
forcing the city to keep moving to stay ahead of the beast. The lovelorn
creature is big enough to capsize the floating city if it gets close enough.

Turtle-Shark
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Capsize boat, shell, swallow whole
Move: 8/14 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A turtle-shark is a cross between a giant snapping turtle and a shark.
Turtle sharks average 20 feet in length and weigh about 10,000 pounds. A
submerged turtle-shark that surfaces under a boat or ship less than 20 feet
long capsizes the vessel 95% of the time. It has a 50% chance to capsize
a vessel that is 20 to 60 feet long, and a 20% chance to capsize one over
60 feet long at the Game Referee's discretion. Turtle-sharks swallow their
prey whole on a roll 4 higher than the number needed to hit. If threatened,
a turtle-shark can withdraw into its shell, leaving it almost completely
impervious to attack.

What Evil Beast Slouches Forth?
The rainy season has struck, six days and nights of water pouring out of
the skies in buckets to drench the earth and anyone caught out in it. The
trees and grasses are thriving, but the ground is a muddy mess that sinks
beneath the boots of anyone slogging through it. Movement is halved in
the sticking morass, and it's hard to see more than a few feet through the
driving rain. Villagers are hunkering down indoors, only going out when
they have to.

They may have to move soon, as a large turtle-shark is using the rain to
move overland. It is wreaking havoc on everything in its cross-country
trek, seeking food wherever it goes. A herd of cattle weathering under a
grove of mangroves was the first victims, and most were sliced in half
and eaten before they could shamble away. The turtle-shark decided to
follow the mooing meat and its path is leading it directly into the small
village of Fen-Krall.

Copyright Notice: Author Erica Balsley.

Turtle-Shark, Stygian
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 18
Armor Class: 0 [19]
Attacks: 1 bite (4d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: +1 or better weapons needed to hit, capsize boat, spell resistance 35%, shell, swallow whole
Move: 8/14 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 20/4,400

The stygian turtle-shark averages 40 feet in length and weighs about 30,000
pounds. A submerged stygian turtle-shark that surfaces under a boat or ship
less than 20 feet long capsizes the vessel 100% of the time. It has a 75%
chance to capsize a vessel from 20 to 60 feet long, and a 50% chance to
capsize one over 60 feet long. Stygian turtle-sharks swallow their prey whole
on a roll 4 higher than the number needed to hit.

Twilight Mushrooms
Twilight mushrooms are purplish-black mushrooms about 4 to 6 inches
in height. They grow in patches of 5-10 mushrooms and are only found in
damp, dark underground areas. Twilight mushrooms sense vibrations and
burst forth a cloud of noxious and choking dust when a living creature
comes within 10 feet of a patch. Creatures within the area must succeed
on a saving throw or take 2d6 points of damage. One minute later another
saving throw must be made—even by those who succeeded on the first
one—to avoid another 1d6 points of damage. Whether or not the saves are
successful, a creature is disabled for 2d4 rounds from fits of choking and
coughing. Such a creature can take no action other than to defend itself.
Sunlight renders twilight mushrooms dormant, and cold instantly
destroys them.

Shortcut to the End of the Line
A slope of nearly bare stone sits in the midst of an otherwise verdant
wood. Water seeps from cracks in the slope's face, indicating that a natural
spring is located beneath it. This has made the slope slick with greenish
slime (but not “green slime”) and has furthermore covered it with 1d4
patches of 1d4+6 twilight mushrooms. The bloated remains of two young
halflings lie at the bottom of the slope. The pair apparently stopped to
investigate the mushrooms and were overcome by their noxious spores.
The halfling bodies have not been touched, for the woodland is rife with
game and the predators have learned to avoid the twilight mushrooms.
Each halfling is dressed in green suits and leather cloaks. They both carry
slings and daggers, and one has a leather sack filled with cuttings and safe
mushrooms.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Ubue
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  3 clubs (1d8) or 3 strikes (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Multiple personalities
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Ubues are a bizarre race that is among the rarest of intelligent races.
They are so rare, in fact, that most people believe their existence to be
only legend. At first sight, many adventurers assume that ubues are a race
of three-headed ettins or trolls. Adventurers who have actually seen these
strange creatures claim that the middle head of an ubue is a different sex
from the other two. This is not true, however, and is in fact merely a side
effect of the bizarre biology of these creatures. Ubues are ashen-skinned
giants dressed in ragged animal hides. They have three heads, three arms
and three legs. Ubue speak their own language.

The three heads of an ubue rarely get along with each other. Due to this
division of personalities, there is a 15% chance in any given situation
(usually once per encounter) that the heads get into an argument. An ubue
engaged in an argument with itself takes a –2 circumstance penalty on
attack rolls, saving throws and AC.

Ubues have a very primitive social system. The strongest male of any
ubue tribe is the leader. Any adult male ubue has the right to challenge
the tribal leader in ritual combat. The loser is banished from the tribe for
a period of one full year, along with his family; ubues cannot tolerate
weakness.

Female ubues usually give birth to only a single child. The birth of twins is
seen as an ill omen, so one child is slain by the tribal shaman as a sacrifice
to their god. The shaman casts bones or sticks to determine which child is to
be the sacrifice. Because ubue society is strongly maledominated, if one twin
is male and the other female, it will always be the female child that is
sacrificed.

Down by the Sea
Down by the shores of a frothy, beryl sea there is a village of squat,
brick houses that look like bulging pumpkins. The village is inhabited
by about 50 whalers and their families and would be unremarkable save
for the tower that casts its shadow over the village. The tower is a temple
dedicated to the sea god Proteus.

The tower is constructed of highly polished sea green stone and rises to
a point. The tower stands 90 feet tall and is 30 feet in diameter. The walls
are (apparently) 10 feet thick, leaving a 10-ft wide space in between them
that is taken up by a long, spiral staircase. The stairs lead to a chamber
in the conical top of the tower. This chamber holds several spiral horns
taken from narwhals and lashed together into a roughly humanoid shape.
When whalers are about to go out to sea, their captains climb these stairs,
lighting candles at various alcoves set into the walls and making sure to
bow at several extra-wide steps to avoid the hook-like blades that spring
out from the ceiling.

The walls of the tower are not, in fact, solid. They contain a second
set of spiral stairs that allow a clan of 3d10 ubue to follow the progress
of people climbing the stairs. A number of secret doors that can only be
opened from the secret stairs allow them to enter the main stairs and take
away intruders that have been felled by the traps or who threaten the idol
at the top of the tower.

The ubue dwell in a secret grotto beneath the tower. The grotto consists
of a main living chamber and three smaller chambers. One of the smaller
chambers is inhabited by the ubue chief, his rather ferocious wife and
three noisy children. Another chamber is used as a dungeon/storage
chamber. The ubue block it with a crude wooden gate fastened with a lock
and chain. The final chamber is home to a phasm, a creature the ubues
believe is the god Proteus himself. The phasm's chamber contains the
ubue's chamber, 1d3 x 1,000 sp, 1d6 x 1,000 gp and a piece of skrimshaw
worth 10 gp.

Phasm:
HD 15; AC 2 [17]; Atk 1 strike (1d3); Move 12; Save 3;
CL/XP 17/3500; Special: Immune to poison, sleep, paralysis
and polymorph, can assume any form up to 12 feet tall.

Credit: The Ubue originally appeared in the First Edition module B3 Palace of
the Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Erica Balsley, based on
original material by Jean Wells.

Vampire Rose
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack:  Stalk (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Camouflage
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Vampire roses look like normal white rose bushes and are often mistaken
for such. A vampire rose stands motionless until its prey moves within
range, when it strikes with a thorny stalk. Opponents are grabbed and
drained of blood. When fully sated with blood, a vampire rose's petals
flush red.

A vampire rose can suck blood from a living victim with its thorns
by making a successful attack with its stalk. If it gets a hold, it deals
1d6 points of damage each round until the victim breaks the hold with a
successful open doors check.
Since a vampire rose looks like a normal white rose bush when at rest,
it surprises on a roll of 1-3 on 1d6 (or 1-3 on 1d8 against druids and
rangers).

Credit: The Vampire Rose originally appeared in the First Edition module
(revised edition) B3 Palace of the Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the
Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Tom
Moldvay and Jean Wells.

Would Still Prick You
With Its Thorns
The wealthy coastal kingdom you have entered is in a terrible state.
The princess has been cast into a eternal, deathless sleep by pricking her
finger on a deep crimson rose, the origin of which is unknown. A number
of scholars and alchemists have been consulted, but none can find a cure.
Archmages, enchantresses and wizards have been sent for, but none have
yet arrived.

Adventurers who wish to try their hand at solving the problem will find
a clue when they first step out of the city walls. An old woman carying
a basket approaches them on the road. The basket is full of bouquets of
deep crimson roses with thorny stems. If questioned about them, she
reveals that they are to be found deep in the forest.

The old woman is an annis hag who disappears as soon as she answers
the question. Naturally, the entire set up is a trap to lure worthies into
the woods to be killed, their souls harvested for her demonic master. The
black annis lives in a crumbling cottage surrounded by a patch of 1d3+1
vampiric roses. The annis hag keeps a treasure of 2d8 x 100 gp and a
jargoon worth 15 gp in the cottage under the floorboards.

Annis: HD 7; AC -1 [20]; Atk 2 claws (1d6+1), bite (1d6); Move 15;
Save 9; CL/XP 9/1100; Special: Magic resistance (50%), cast obscuring
mist 3/day.

Rat, Vapor
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d4 hp
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d3)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: death throes, gaseous form, slowed by cold, heal 2
points/round, 5% are diseased
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Vapor rats resemble normal rats in all respects. Though more intelligent,
they possess a lot of the same traits and conduct themselves in much the
same way as normal rats. When slain, their bodies burst in a cloud of
grayish green vapors that fill a 10-foot radius and acts as a stinking cloud.
Vapor rats can assume gaseous form once per day, and they heal 2 points
per round. They are slowed by cold.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Rats on a Sinking Ship
A three-masted galleon sits broken across the Slister Reef, its central
mast splintered at the deck and canted against the forward sail. A ragged
hole at the waterline shows where sharp coral sliced open the wood. The
ship sits atop the coral reef, but won’t sail until repairs are made.
The hold is filled with the galleon's last cargo: a few tons of grain
molded beyond use. Bits of string, a silver serving dish, a gold-braided
sash and a handful of various coins (worth 120 gp total) sit atop the moldy
grain. A colony of 3d6 vapor rats lives in the rotting grain.

Wasp, Vapor
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 sting (1d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: death throes, gaseous form, slowed by cold, heal 2
points/round, poison
Move: 1/18 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Vapor wasps resemble giant wasps in all respects. In some rare species
their coloration seems to vary slightly (a blue stripe on the abdomen is
the giveaway). When slain, their bodies burst in a cloud of grayish green
vapors that fill a 10-foot radius and acts as a stinking cloud. Vapor wasps
can assume gaseous form once per day, and they heal 2 points per round.
They are slowed by cold.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Smoke and Stings
A bloated body lies on the ground beside a fallen tree in the Kajaani
Forest, the man's features and hands puffed up beyond recognition. His
skin is beet red and his clothes stretched so tightly on his body that his
corpse looks like an overstuffed sausage. A canister emitting a stream of
smoke sits beside the man, gray wisps rising into the still air. Hanging
from his belt are a small axe, a wedge and a length of coiled rope.
A nest of vapor wasps lives in an underground nest nearby, and the
man had the foolhardy idea of smoking the creatures out so he could
chop down timber to repair his home. He had no idea the creatures were
anything other than normal wasps, and assumed his “smoke ’em out”
strategy would work this time as well. The man merely angered the
vaporous creatures, which swarmed out and stung him to death. The
insects are still extremely riled up, and anyone approaching the body is
bombarded by 3d8 vapor wasps.

Vegepygmy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: 1 strike (1d4) or weapon (1d6)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Immunity to electricity, resistance to piercing
weapons (50%)
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A vegepygmy resembles a humanoid with green vegetable-like skin and
razor-sharp claws. Its head sports two large yellow eyes, a wide mouth,
inset nose, and a topknot of dark brown leaves. Leafy tendrils protrude
from its shoulders, midsection, arms, and legs.
When a living creature is slain by russet mold (see that entry), it rises
as a 1 HD vegepygmy. Vegepygmies are plants possessed of a primitive
intelligence. They make their home deep in the forests or underground
away from most settled areas. They are hunters and scavengers, and
carnivorous, preying on living creatures weaker than themselves. A 1 HD
vegepygmy stands 2 feet tall, gaining 6” to its height with each additional
HD. The largest vegepygmies, called chiefs, have 6 HD and stand 4-1/2
feet tall. Though they do not seem to have ears, it is well known that
vegepygmies can hear.

Vegepygmies do not speak, but communicate with
others of their kind by thumping their chest or rapping
their spears on rocks, earth, or some other solid surface.
It is not known if or how they communicate with other
creatures.

The chiefs are the only vegepygmies with a spore
attack. A chief vegepygmy can release a cloud of spores
in a 40-foot spread. A living creature caught within the
cloud must succeed on a saving throw or be paralyzed
for 2d6 rounds. After the paralysis wears off, the character
must succeed on another saving throw or take 3d6 points of
constitution damage.

At constitution 0 a creature dies, and rises as a 4 HD vegepygmy
in one day. If a cure disease spell is cast on a paralyzed victim before
the paralysis wears off, he does not have to attempt the second saving
throw and takes no constitution damage.

Vegepygmies often share their lairs with shriekers and russet molds.

Credit: The Vegepygmy originally appeared in the First Edition module S3
Expedition to the Barrier Peaks (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1980) and later
in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and
is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Brass Tubes and Glass Prisms
Via a secret passage in a dungeon one might come upon an underground
vault inhabited by a tribe of vegepygmies. The tribe consists of 3d10 x
10 vegepygmies (1 HD), 2d4 guards (2 HD), 2d4 bodyguards (3 HD),
one subchief (4 HD) per fifty vegepygmies and a single 6 HD chief. The
vegepygmies also keep 1d4 patches of russet mold, 1d3 shriekers and
1d20+4 thornies as guard animals.
The vault of the vegpygmies is about 1 mile wide and 2 miles long, with
a ceiling that rises as high as 300 feet. The vault has numerous ledges and
side caverns, all lit with a greenish light that emanates from a deep pit in
the center of the vault. The pit is 30 feet deep and contains a glowing orb
of glassy metal. The tribe's patches of russet mold grow on the sides of
this pit. Captives of the vegepygmies are thrown into this pit.
Although the vegepygmies live as primitives, making weapons from
flint deposits in their vault, they possess a wondrous library that was
clearly handed down from a more advanced people. The library is
located in a long tunnel that spurs from the main vault. The library
consists of a number of brass tubes. Inside each tube there is a glass
prism. When a prism is held up to the light and one looks in the end, a
stream of strange glyphs seems to rush at the eye. Those who understand
these glyphs can read these prisms as though they were books. Several
of the prisms are alchemical reference tomes, and one is the spellbook
of a 6th level alien magic-user.


Vilstrak
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack: 2 thumps (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Merge with earth, surprise on roll of 1-3 on 1d6 in
rocky areas
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality (chaotic tendencies)
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Vilstraks (or tunnel thugs) dwell underground, away from the surface
world. A vilstak is a bipedal, man-sized semi-humanoid seemingly carved
of stone. It has an insect-like head, long, large arms and thick, trunk-like
legs that end in hoof-like feet. Though they have no allergy or reaction to
sunlight, they disdain its existence, preferring the cold, damp blackness
of their underground world. A vilstrak's lair is a “pocket” formed deep
inside the earth. These pockets have no exits or entrances and are only
reachable by those who can pass through stone or earth.

A typical vilstrak stands 6 feet tall and weighs about 200 pounds. Its
arms have an extra joint between the elbow and wrist, and its arms end
in large, powerful fists of stone. Vilstraks are gray or brown. They speak
their own grating language.

A vilstrak can merge with earth or stone at will. A vilstrak can see what
goes on outside the stone and it can remain merged as long as it desires.

Angry Spirits of the Mountains
A band of 2d8+4 vilstraks has taken up residence in a mountain pass.
The resident barbarians of the mountains call them the spirits of the
mountains and consider the pass to be taboo, attacking any who would
venture into the pass and “anger the spirits”. Adventurers have a 5 in 6
chance of encountering a band of resident barbarians including 1d10+10
berserkers, accompanied by a shaman (cleric or druid of 3rd to 7th level)
wearing dozens of strings of cave bear fangs around their necks, ankles
and wrists.
Three winters ago, a caravan carrying various parts needed to construct
an iron golem was sacked by the vilstraks, who scattered the parts around
their pass. The bodies of the victims were left to rot, and successive
snows and icy winds have preserved the corpses in a macabre rictus. One
of the corpses wears chainmail and carries a +1 shield emblazoned with
the image of a white lily.
The vilstraks dwell in caverns beneath the pass, caverns that can be
reached via a small cavern, big enough for a halfling, located about 300
feet up the side of one of the mountains that flanks the pass. The actual
lair of the vilstraks measures about 20 feet in diameter, with a 10-foot
high ceiling. It contains a treasure of 1d6 x 100 cp, 2d8 x 100 sp, 2d12 x
10 gp an orichalcum necklace (worth 2d8 x 10 gp) and an obsidian sphere
worth 1d12 x 10 gp.

Credit: The Vilstrak originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Volt
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d4 plus blood drain) and tail slap (2d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Blood drain, shock, immunity to electricity
Move: 0/12 (Flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A volt is a small, spherical beast with a long, sinewy tail trailing it.
Its body is covered with thick gray bristles. Two large eyes resembling
those of a fly dominate its head. Small horns protrude above these from
its head.

Volts inhabit underground caverns and caves, preferring to lair in areas
dampened by water. A typical grouping consists of up to 20 creatures,
though it's anyone's guess which are male and which are female (if such
a thing among volts actually exists).

A volt's spheroid body is about 3 feet across. Its tail is nearly 3 feet long
and formed of semi-hardened tissue. Its mouth, unseen at first by those
viewing it, is located near the underside of its body and is filled with rows
of needle-like teeth.

If a volt hits with a bite attack, it latches onto the opponent's body. An
attached volt has an AC of 6 [13], and holds on with great tenacity. An
attached volt can be attacked or removed with an open doors check.
An attached volt drains blood, dealing 1d6 points of damage in any
round when it begins its turn attached to a victim. Once it has dealt 12
points of damage, it detaches and flies off to digest the meal. If its victim
dies before the volt's appetite has been sated, the volt detaches and seeks
a new target.

A volt delivers an electrical charge with its tail slap that deals 2d4 points
of damage. This damage cannot reduce a person's hp below 0. An
attached volt can attack its victim with its tail slap with a +2 bonus to hit
in the same round.

Take Their Joules
A long, seemingly endless tunnel underground is traversed by swarm
after swarm of 1d10+10 volts riding fierce, electrically charged winds.
The schools of volts originate from a sparkling portal located about 60
feet down the tunnel and then re-enter a second portal 60 feet further up
the tunnel. These portals lead to the borderlands between the elemental
planes of air and water, which manifests as an eternally stormy sky.
The volts are dangerous enough that adventurers might wish to avoid
the tunnel, but the portals also block further progress into the dungeon.
Each portal is ringed in a collar of silver measuring 10 feet in diameter
and 6 inches wide. Each of these collars weighs about 1 ton, and is thus
worth 2,000 gp if it could be removed from the stone and transported out
of the dungeon. The only way to switch off the portals is to link them
with a conductive metal. Just touching a portal delivers 3d6 electrical
shock damage (save to avoid bursting into flame, suffering 1d6 points of
damage per round and possibly losing flammable objects).

Credit: The Volt originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (© TSR/
Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jonathon
Jones.

Vorin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: Sting (2d6 + poison) and bite (2d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Paralytic poison, spit, immune to acid, resists fire,
breathes water
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A vorin is an immense greenish-black thing with intense yellow eyes.
It is 30 feet long and a foot thick. The body of the thing is a worm-like
mass of pulpy flesh with several gill-like apertures along its length with
which it propels itself through the water. The front of the beast has a long
trunk similar to that of an elephant. Its skin glistens as if coated with a fine
sheen of oil. A vorin can deliver a paralytic poison through a barb in its
bite or via its sting. Once per round, a vorin can spit a blob of this poison
at a single opponent within 50 feet (save avoids).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Cistern Dweller
The floor of this 20-foot-square dungeon room contains five 5-footdiameter pits filled with stagnant water. Each pit is surrounded by a
1-foot-high raised lip of bricks. Water pools on the stone floor in wide
puddles. Each water-filled pit goes straight down for 20 feet where it
opens into an underground cistern. Sitting next to each pit are a number of
buckets. The buckets are useless, the wooden slats burned and blackened.
A vorin lives inside the cistern, and rises out to attack anyone disturbing
the water. The creature leaps from pit to pit around the room to target
creatures trying to get away from it. The pits form an X on the floor and
allow the vorin to reach every corner of the room.
The water is contaminated by the vorin's poisonous bile, and kills
anything that drinks it (save avoids).

Vulchling
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1+1
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  Bite (1d6) and 2 claws (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Track by scent
Move: 9/6 (Flying)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Vulchlings are a malevolent race of avian creatures akin to the vulture.
Their faces, though bird-like, seem to have an almost human quality to
them. Vulchlings are not only scavengers but also predators, feeding on
living prey as well as carrion. Vulchlings can occasionally be found in
the company of harpies or vrocks, but most of their time is spent in their
lairs—usually large nests found deep within the earth. Vulchlings speak
their own language. Some (15%) speak the common tongue as well.
Vulchlings prefer to attack from secret or ambush by lying in wait for
their prey and then swooping in to attack with their razor-sharp talons and
beak. Slain opponents are carried back to the vulchlings’ lair and fed to
the young vulchlings.

Credit: The Vulchling originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Mad Scientists Associates
The craggy landscape the adventurers have wandered into is dominated
by a stronghold of leaden gray bricks and latten doors. The stronghold is
a tower keep, triangular in shape with three tall, slim towers with conical
roofs missing some of their roof tiles. Perched on the battlements above
is a flock of 1d8+8 vulchlings, the associates of the resident mad scientist
(a magic-user of 9th level).
The stronghold has a few windows located about 20 feet above the
ground. A wide staircase leads up to the front door, which in turn leads
into a barren hall. Staircases from the hall lead to the towers (themselves
leading to the upper floors of the keep) and doors lead into a kitchen and
study. The study is equipped with a number of scholarly tomes (including
a portion of a manual of flesh golem creation).
A secret passage in the study grants access to the laboratory in the
cellar, a laboratory containing workbenches stained with acid, a stone
slab embedded with manacles and a copper cabinet containing vials of
bodily humors, jars containing preserved organs, etc.
The floor of the laboratory has several iron grates set into it, each leading
to a small, 6-foot by 6-foot cell inhabited by 1d4+1 zombies.
The mad scientist's chambers contain a lead coffer (poison needle in the
lock) of treasure: 1d4 x 100 sp, 1d4 x 10 gp, 1d6 x 100 pp, 1d12 pounds
of frankincense (worth 150 gp per pound), a slab of malachite and white
marble squares (a chess board) worth 1d6 x 10 gp and the magic-user's
spellbooks.

Wang Liang
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 Bite (1d6 plus poison) and 2 claws (1d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Magic or silver weapons needed to hit, immune to
disease and poison, regeneration, spells
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Wang liangs are completely hairless feral humanoid creatures with
gray skin and a mouth lined with rows of shark-like teeth. A wang liang
delivers a virulent poison with its bite or claws. The poison imposes a -1
cumulative to-hit penalty to attack rolls unless a save is made. The poison
effect lasts 1 hour. Wang liangs regenerate 3 hp per round. They
may cast darkness 15-foot radius at will.

Copyright Notice: Author Casey Christofferson.

The Wang Liang Clan
A mountain cave opens onto an infernal spectacle. Red rocks coated
with oil burn brightly, filling the cave with a thick pall of smoke. Demonic
faces painted in ash and soot decorate the walls, and bloody strips of flesh
hang from twine strung across the room. A giant statue of a demonic
figure reclines against the far wall, its razor-taloned hands holding a
glowing black orb. Its eye glow with a furious red light.
Surrounding the statue are six humanoids wearing heavy woolen robes
completely hiding their features. These same figures have been visiting
towns and villages in the guise of traveling minstrels, and always leave
shortly before tragedy strikes. A bounty of 200 gp has been placed on
these traveling monks’ heads for their capture, but no one has had any
luck bringing them to justice. The “monks” are neither monks nor even
human and have no intention of going quietly.
This group of 6 wang liangs wants to incite chaos in the Hollow Spire
Mountains. The creatures hide their features unless confronted, at which
time they whip off their robes and attack with their poisonous claws.
The black globe in the statue's hands is a gate to Hell that activates if
touched. The ball of swirling darkness expands with a tortured shriek to
swallow the person touching the orb. Screams fill the cave as the globe
shrinks back to its normal size. The wang liangs try to force PCs
near the orb.

WEIRDS
Weirds are creatures from the various inner and outer planes (including the demi-, para-, and
quasi-elemental planes as well as the elemental planes).
They are sometimes encountered on the Material Plane, often in the
employ of a powerful spellcaster. Bribery is the usual means of gaining
the services of a weird, though some spellcasters resort to even more
deceitful practices or trickery to gain the services of these creatures.
Spellcaster beware! Weirds are intelligent creatures and do not take kindly
to deception (unless they are the ones engaging in such trickery).

All weirds, regardless of their makeup, are serpent-like creatures about
10 feet long, and being of an evil and malign nature. Weirds speak the
common language of weirds and the language native to their home plane.
Some speak more languages, and still some can speak Common.

Weird, Blood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Grab, drown, transparent, reform
Move: 12 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

Blood weirds resemble 10-foot long, crimson serpents with glistening
dark red scales. Some have bands of black that spiral the length of their
body. Their eyes are a deep reddish-brown in color. Blood weirds are
virtually invisible in their pools until they attack with a vicious bite. If a
blood weird bites an opponent, it attempts to pull the victim into its pool
to drown (save resists). When a weird is slain, it collapses back into its
pool and reforms in 1d4 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

In Cold Blood
This icy chamber sits deep within the twisting ice caverns of the
Wailing Glacier. The room is roughly 100 feet wide and long, and the
jagged ice ceiling soars 60 feet overhead. Water droplets fall in a steady
beat from the melting roof, the drops plunking into the frozen surface of
a 60-foot-wide circular pool contained by a three-foot-tall shimmering
wall of clear, diamond-hard ice. An inch-thick ice layer on the surface
of the pool covers three feet of blood swirling within the basin. The air
smells of copper.
Three skeletons waving short swords are frozen in place from their
waists down in the bloody basin. Icy fingers of frost climb among
their bones and hold them fast in the pool. They wave their weapons
menacingly, but cannot escape the ice.
The true threat is a pack of 4 blood weirds that live in the frigid pool
of blood. The creatures punch through the ice easily to get at creatures
outside the basin.

Weird, Fungus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Camouflage, fungus pool, sleep spores, reform,
vulnerable to fire
Move: 0
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

A fungus weird is a 10-foot long serpent formed of fungus, plants,
and tangled vines that resides in a 20-foot “pool” of brambles, mosses,
leaves, fungi and plants. A fungus weird can never leave its pool, and
is effectively invisible until it attacks. Once every 1d4 rounds, a fungus
weird can release a puff of spores in a 10-foot cone. These spores induce
sleep (as per the sleep spell) if the opponent fails a save. Unlike the sleep
spell, there is no HD limit or maximum HD affected.When reduced to 0
hp or less, a fungus weird collapses back into its pool. Four rounds
later, it reforms at full strength minus any damage taken from fire.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Forest Altar
A hill rises in the middle of the deep woods. Vines of yellow ivy and
brilliant red dahlias prosper on the rise as it climbs nearly 30 feet above
the forest floor. A 20-foot-wide dirt swath surrounds the hill, cutting it off
from the rest of the forest. Plants grow thick on the hill, rising to about
waist height. Atop the hill, a small golden altar gleams in the sunlight.

The altar is all that remains of a forest cult that met under the full moon
each month. It is carved from stone and covered in flaking gold leaf. PCs
searching the hillside find broken and bent bones scattered throughout the
undergrowth. The bleached skeletal remains include human skulls, crushed
femurs and splintered thigh bones.  A fungus weird is trapped on the hill and
survives on the travelers who unwittingly stumble into its lair. The fungus
weird was summoned by the cultists who barely managed to trap the creature
from getting loose into the rest of the forest. Enchantments cast on the bare
strip of earth around the hill stops the weird from escaping into the forest.

Weird, Lava
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8 + 1d8 fire)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Grab, drown, fire, transparent, reform, control
elemental, immune to fire
Move: 12 (swim)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A lava weird appears as a 10-foot-long serpent formed of elemental fire.
Closer examination reveals liquid rock in scale-like patterns across its body,
growing darker across its back. Two small flickers of white fire located on
its head serve as eyes. The bite of a lava weird deals bite damage plus 1d8
pointsfire damage. Lava weirds can command any fire or earth elemental within
50 feet. The elemental gets a save to resist this command. Lava weirds are
virtually invisible in their lava pools until they lash out at victims with
a vicious bite. If a weird bites an opponent, it attempts to pull the victim
into its pool to drown (save resists). When a lava weird is slain, it
collapses back into its pool and reforms in 1d4 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

To the Hilt
The corridor opens into a smithy's dream, with a river of lava flowing
through a channel in the stone-cut floor. The air is thick with soot and
noxious gases, and smoke hangs like dark clouds against the 30-foothigh ceiling. A stone bridge crosses the lava flow where a basalt anvil sits
on a 20-foot-tall platform. Ash-covered steps rise around the platform,
although no railing protects climbers from falling into the lava flow. A set
of glowing metal tongs and a sword hilt sit on the anvil.

A lava weird lives in the lava flow, and is tasked with keeping intruders from
reaching the anvil. The weird is nearly 30 feet long and rises out of the
magma if PCs climb the stairs. The lava weird can reach anyone on the platform
or stairs.

The hilt sitting on the anvil is white-hot, although it appears normal.
Anyone touching it takes 2d6 points of damage (save for half) from the burning
metal. The tongs are cool to the touch, but are coated with a gluey substance
that sticks to flesh (1d6 points of damage to pull the tongs free).  The hilt
can be dipped into any normal fire to create a flaming blade for 2d4 rounds
that does 2d6 points of damage.

Weird, Lightning
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8 + 1d8 electricity)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Control elemental, electricity, immune to
electricity, transparent, reform
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Lightning weirds resemble 10-foot-long serpents composed of yellow
or white crackling lightning. Brilliant flares of electricity function as
the creature's eyes and small bolts of electricity leap and dance from its
form. The bite of a lightning weird deals bite damage plus 1d8 points
of electrical damage. Lightning weirds can command any air elemental
within 50 feet. The elemental gets a save to resist this command. When
a lightning weird is slain, it collapses into a sparking pool and reforms in
1d4 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Its Alive!
Miredown Keep sits on a lonely promontory jutting out over the Sagarran
Sea. Lightning dances in the dark clouds roiling around the peaks, and
ball lightning dances along the rooflines of the once-proud structure. The
majority of the castle's floors are just shadows of the place's former glory,
but the dungeon laboratory is still alarmingly clean and well-maintained.
A slab of metal swings in the center of the room from long gleaming
metal chains that run to a door set in the ceiling. Winches and pulleys
line the room's walls, and four 10-foot-tall metal spikes ringed by
ceramic plates stand in the chamber. The ceramic plates are decorated
with indecipherable sigils. Lightning sparks and cracks along the tips of
each metal spike. Standing in the corners of the room are two 9-foot-tall
flesh golems, each fitted with a metal-studded collar. Two-foot-long metal
spikes jut from their sewn flesh.
The flesh golems defend the apparatuses scattered around the room,
while the metal spikes hum with electricity. In 1d4 rounds, the spikes
harness enough electrical energy from the outside air to create a ring of
electricity 10 feet off the floor. The lightning arcs and cracks, and jumps
from the metal posts to the spikes sticking out of the flesh golems. The
golems heal 2d8 points of damage each round from the electrical bursts.
Any PC caught in a lightning stream takes 4d6 points of damage.
Four rounds after the lightning ring ignites, a rift opens above the metal
slab and draws a lightning weird into the room. The lightning weird's
arrival instantly short-circuits the current, shutting down the lightning show
in the room (and removing the healing current arcing to the flesh golems).
The lightning weird leaps from metal spike to metal spike as it arcs about
the room in a burst of radiant blue fire. It can also jump to a flesh golem to
heal it for 1d6 points of damage each round it maintains contact.

Flesh Golem (2): HD 10 (45hp); AC 9[10]; Atk
2 fists (2d8); Move 8; Save 5; CL/XP 12/2000;
Special: Healed by lightning, hit only by
magic weapons, slowed by fire and
cold, immune to most spells.

Well Lurker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 6 tentacles (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Swallow whole
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A well lurker looks like a freshwater well, with the beast's 10-foot-long
tentacles and devouring mouth hidden behind a rock-like collar sticking
out of the ground. A typical well lurker covers a 10-foot area, though
specimens can cover a 30-foot area. If a well lurker's tentacle hits, it
wraps around the target and pulls the creature toward the lurker's mouth
to be swallowed automatically on the next round. It can swallow a mansized creature or smaller (a save resists). Animals can detect the unnatural
presence of a well lurker and are generally nervous in its presence.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

All's Well
The grounds of Brull Keep are littered with the broken stones of four
collapsed towers. The central complex is nothing but broken walls. The
dungeons beneath the once-grand keep are inaccessible unless tons of
stone blocks are carefully removed.
Sitting in the middle of the destruction, like an oasis in the middle of
the deadliest desert, is a small green rectangle of verdant grasses and
daisies. Miniature apple trees grow in small copses, and a small stone
well sits nearby. A garden of vegetables grows naturally in the middle of
the rubble.
This small paradise used to be the keep's central courtyard and was used
to grow fruits and vegetables. When the building fell during a requiem
beetle's assault, the central courtyard survived. Now, it serves as a resting
spot for travelers and others looking for riches in the keep's abandoned
dungeons. A well lurker also uses the spot as its hunting grounds, hiding
in plain sight in the middle of the high grasses as it waits for prey. The
lurker assumes the shape of the small stone well nestled among the apple
trees.

Widow Creeper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 tentacles (1d8) or entangle
Saving Throw: 6
Special: Control plants, drain fluid
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

A widow creeper is an 8-foot-tall giant black widow formed from
leaves, weeds, and tangled brush. Two long, sinewy vine-like tentacles
protrude from its body and aid the creature in capturing and securing its
prey. A widow creeper fires a mass of sticky, clinging vines and weeds
up to 60 feet at a target to entangle a victim (save avoids). If a widow
creeper hits with a tentacle, it grabs and automatically maintains a hold.
The next round it sucks bodily fluids from its captive, dealing 1d6 points
of damage. A widow creeper can animate plants (as animate objects) 3
times per day.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Patient Widow
Bodies litter the Tanglethorn Thicket. Two satyrs lie in a clump of thick
grass, their flesh ashen and cheeks sunken. A human traveler slumps
against a fir tree, his lifeless body wan and pale. His green cloak is slashed
and torn. His horse lies dead on its side, still tied to a tree. A covered
wagon is overturned nearby, its large wheels broken and yanked off the
axle. Gouges mar the wooden transport's sides, undercarriage and roof.
Inside the wagon is a wizened old woman named Hertha Oxley and her
granddaughter, Beatrice. The pair were sleeping when the wagon was
roughly overturned as Beatrice's father screamed from outside where he
stood watch. They’ve been trapped for three days, although an abundance
of baked goods and rainwater has sustained them. They didn’t see what
overturned the wagon, but the old woman proclaims it to be “vampire
from the old country” chasing her family. The lack of blood in and around
the bodies seems to bear this out.
The family made the mistake of camping near a widow creeper's web.
The giant spider-like creature overturned the wagon but couldn’t get at
the people inside. The creature now waits patiently for them to come out.
The spider leaves its victims where they fall, each body drained of blood.
PCs investigating the wagon hear the rustling of leaves in the tangled
forest. PCs who try to find the source of the noise find the immense
widow creeper waiting.

Wight, Barrow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Slam (1d4 + energy drain)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Level drain, insanity gaze
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

Barrow wights are undead creatures akin to normal wights, but
they are always found in or near barrows, usually guarding the
treasure contained therein. Creatures hit by a barrow wight's
slam attack are drained of one level. Creatures killed by this
level drain rise as barrow wights in 1d4 rounds and remain
under their creator's control until it is destroyed. Anyone with
30 feet that meets a barrow wight's gaze is affected as if by a
symbol of insanity spell unless they make a successful saving throw.

Cold Heart
As one travels across the steppe, they may come across a strange
embankment. Circular and 100 feet in diameter, the embankment rises
about 4 feet. Just within the embankment there is a small ditch about 3
feet deep. The area inside the embankment is otherwise flat, save for a 9
foot high man-made hill in the center. The hill is 30 feet in diameter. It
contains a barrow tomb holding the cremated remains of a neolithic king
and his four wives, who were buried alive. Unlike the happily cremated
king, the four wives have not rested peacefully. Their horrified spirits
reanimated their corpses, turning them into barrow wights.
The queen's were tied with leather thongs (long since rotted away)
and placed into small, stone coffins measuring about 3-ft x 3-ft and
covered with stone lids. It is in these coffins that they await the
arrival of tomb robbers, being fully capable of casting the lids
from their resting places to surprise (on a 1-2 on 1d6) their prey.
The king's ashes and bones are stored in a stone urn, along with
his valuable burial objects. More mundane objects - stone knives,
arrowheads, ancient pelts - litter the floor of the tomb. The entrance
to the tomb points west and is completely obscured by earth. If the earth
is cleared away (takes about 1 hour), one sees a short corridor lined with
megaliths that have been painted with hunting scenes and depictions of
the spirit world. At the end of this passageway is the tomb proper, sealed
by another megalith weighing 3 tons.
The sealed tomb contains a sapphire worth 800 gp, two lapis lazuli
worth 135 gp each, a terracotta cup worth 45 gp, 1d4 x 100 gp and 1d12
x 100 sp in the form of ring coinage.

Copyright Notice: Authors Clark Peterson and Scott Greene.

Wight, Blood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Engulf, wounding, magic weapons to hit
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

Blood wights are powerful undead standing 8 to 10 feet tall and
weighing 400 to 550 pounds. The wight's body constantly oozes blood. It
is immune to nonmagical weapons. If a blood wight hits an opponent with
two claws, it engulfs the victim in the next round and holds them inside its
body until the person drowns. The blood wight's claws cause a persistent
wound that bleeds for 1 hit point per round until healed.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Blood Drive
The rumble of a fast-moving wagon and galloping horses can be heard.
From down the road comes a large stagecoach-type carriage that bounces
out of control as a team of 6 horses flees in fear. Thin wisps of smoke
trail from the carriage's closed windows. Blood drips from the doors and
the undercarriage as the coach races past. The driver lies tangled in the
ribbons as she dangles over the side of the driver's box. Garments stream
from partially opened baggage compartments strapped to the back of the
carriage.
The stagecoach continues on unless stopped. Within the coach is a
blood wight. How or why it came to be in a stagecoach is up to the Game
Referee. The bloody creatures may attempt to drag PCs into the coach or
burst from the door once someone is close enough.
The driver clings to life after hours of being battered along the side of
the coach. Within the coach are three passengers who drowned in blood
from the monstrosity in their midst. PCs may feel the need to contact
the next of kin. This information and more may be obtained from the
remaining personal effects of the deceased. One possibility is that one
of the passengers was a frail magic-user carrying vital information or a
dangerous artifact to be delivered to a noble.

Willow Dusk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 branches (2d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Droning, magic weapons needed to hit, misery,
regeneration, swallow whole
Move: 8
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

A willow dusk is a willow tree that grows to a height of 40 feet or more.
Once every 1d4+1 rounds, a willow dusk can emit a wave of negative
energy that affects all living creatures within 10 feet. Creatures hearing
the sound become sad and disheartened, with a 10% cumulative chance
per wave of lying down in despair. Once per round, a willow dusk can
emit a droning audible sound up to 100 feet away that causes creatures
to become lethargic (save resists). Affected creatures cannot move (as if
held by a hold person spell) for 1d6 rounds. If 2 branches hit the same
target, the willow dusk grabs the opponent and swallows him on the next
round (save resists). While touching the ground, willow dusks regenerate
3 hp every round. It does not regenerate fire or acid damage and
dies if it reaches 0 hp.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Captive Willow
A magical doorway opens in the Cold Laurel Forest when the full moon
rises above the trees. The shimmering portal flows like a watery curtain
between two ancient pine trees and opens into a dimensional pocket where
a willow dusk is trapped. The magic is weak after centuries containing the
creature. The pull of the full moon now warps the energies and allows the
deadly tree to escape. The tree is starving and charges through gate and
into the hills in search of food.
The portal slices violently shut after three days, sealing the forest world
away for another month – along with anyone trapped inside it. Woodland
creatures can pass easily through the open gate, and forest animals
frequently wander into the extradimensional world. Their bones litter the
one-square-mile forest. Most of the animals are hunted and killed by the
vicious willow dusk when it returns. If the willow dusk fails to get back
through the portal before it closes, it withers and dies in the real world.

Wind Walker
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack:  Wind blast (2d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: +1 or better weapon to hit, detect thoughts,
immunity to magic, telepathy 100 ft.
Move: 15/24 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1100

Wind walkers are creatures from the Elemental Plane of Air. They are
often summoned to the Material Plane by magic-users or clerics who
employ them as guards. On occasion, a wind walker is encountered in the
service of a cloud giant, storm giant, efreet, djinn, or other such creature.
A wind walker's natural form is that of a roaring and whistling column
of wind about 12 feet tall. No discernable features can be seen in the wind
walker.
A wind walker attacks using the air surrounding it, transforming it into
a forceful blast that deals 2d6 points of damage to all creatures within 10
feet. The wind walker makes a single attack roll against each opponent
within reach.
A wind walker can continuously use ESP as the spell, except it has a
range of 100 feet. If two wind walkers are present, they can link their
minds together to increase the range to 200 feet. If three or more wind
walkers are present, they can link their minds to increase the range to 300
feet. All wind walkers that are mind linked gain this range boost.
A wind walker is immune spells and spell-like abilities. In addition,
certain spells and effects function differently against the creature as
follows.
Mind-affecting spells and effects function normally against a wind
walker.
A control weather spell instantly slays a wind walker if it fails a saving
throw.
A haste spell deals 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels to a
wind walker. A saving throw halves the damage. In addition, a haste spell
increases the damage the wind walker deals with its wind blast attack by
+1d6 for one round.
An ice storm spell deals no damage to a wind walker, but affects it as
if by a fear spell.
A slow spell deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level to a wind
walker. A saving throw halves the damage.
A summoned or called wind walker is affected normally by magical
barriers that restrict or inhibit called or summoned creatures.
A wind walker can communicate telepathically with any creature within
100 feet that has a language.

Credit: The Wind Walker originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

An Ill Wind Blows
An otherwise unremarkable cave in a range of werewolf-haunted
mountains leads to a storm giant's castle in the upper peaks. The cave
is located on a rough slope blanketed by spruce. About a mile east of
the cave there is a ruined castle of granite blocks and sweeping, gothic
buttresses. The ruins are now the lair of a pack of 1d4+1 werewolves, the
former lords of the area (and a persistent annoyance to the storm giants).
The cave itself has a wide mouth overgrown with lichens and liverworts,
but with a well beaten path from the cave mouth to the valley below.
Above the mouth of the cave a coat of arms has been carved into the stone
and shows signs of once being painted. The arms depicted an eagle sable
on a field gules flanked by a sun and moon proper.
The lower portions of the cave are inhabited by 1d3+2 cave bears. The
cave bear lair is littered with cracked bones and a rusted shirt of mail.
There are signs that the cave was once used as storage, perhaps by the
lords of the ruined castle. A high gallery in the cave leads to tunnels
that climb higher in the mountain. One of these tunnels leads into a
subterranean fairyland of oreads lounging around a shrine of Elemental
Earth consisting of a granite block bearing bas-reliefs of grotesque faces.
Another tunnel leads up to a higher vault guarded by a gang of 1d3+1
wind walkers.
The wind walkers’ vault contains a number of bronze poles that run
from the ceiling to the floor, most of them placed at odd angles. The poles
are places about 8 to 12 feet apart. The poles do not bother the wind
walkers in the least, but they make fighting difficult for others (players
can choose to accept a -2 penalty to their Armor Class or a -2 penalty “to
hit”). The poles are not just an annoyance, but also a means of traveling
to the upper plateau and the storm giants’ castle. The poles are activated
with electricity, with all those touching the pole while it is electrified
being transported to the castle above.

Winter Bloom
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: spore cloud (2d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Spore cloud
Move: 0 (immobile)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Winterblooms are small flowers with bluish-white petals, dark sapphirecolored stems, and small white leaves growing near the base. Winterblooms
can generally be found in temperate and cold climates during the winter
months when it is in full bloom. It gives off a slightly sweet scent that can
be detected to a range of 30 feet. If a patch of winterbloom is disturbed,
the plant releases a burst of poisonous spores in the form of a bluish-white
cloud of chilled vapor. Creatures within 10 feet of the winterbloom must
save or take 2d4 points of damage as the inhaled spores form ice crystals
on the victim's lungs. The cloud remains in the area for 1d3 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

To Die For
Prince Inferian IV is furious. He recently requested a very special
courtship bouquet from Emil Hattan, a flower grower who specializes
in rare blooms. The flowers were to be delivered before the arrival of his
bride-to-be, Princess Marinal of the Northlanders. The Hattans haven’t
arrived yet with the special arrangement, and the prince is sure their
negligence is going to jeopardize the fragile peace this planned marriage
would bring. The Hattans have a small growing operation on the outskirts
of Hullmay Valley, but the winter has made travel near impossible. The
Northlanders sled dogs could be slowed by the drifts, however, so the
prince is desperate to get the flowers.
The Hattans’ growing shacks are three wooden buildings connected by
three covered trenches. A cloyingly sweet scent of blossoming flowers
drifts over the ice-covered lands around the shacks. Temperatures are
controlled inside each building, with one a hothouse for desert flowers,
a second for temperate climes, and the third kept barely above freezing.
Inside the frost-filled greenhouse are the six frozen members of the
Hattan family, each body writhing in unimaginable pain on the carpeted
floor. Prince Inferian's special rush request caused the Hattans to cut a
few corners – and they paid for it with their lives. Growing in the cold
greenhouse are 10 winterblooms. The flowers killed the flower sellers
with their spores and the cold froze their bodies. Fortunately, the Hattans
finished the bouquet before the rest of the plants killed them. The
arrangement sits on a table in the center of the living winterblooms.

Witch Grass
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Attacks: None
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Seed spray, spell failure
Move: 0 (immobile)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Witch grass is a summer-blooming, broadleaved plant that stands 1 to
2 feet tall at maturity. It is very bushy and its leaves and branches have
a purplish hue. Its base and roots are thick and have the same purplish
hue. A typical patch of witch grass covers a 10-foot area, though it often
covers an area as large as 50 feet or more. It is only found in temperate or
warm climates and in areas of naturally occurring grass such as forests,
plains, and hills. Witch grass causes Magic-User spells cast within 20 feet
to fail (10% chance). Anyone approaching within 10 feet of a patch of
witch grass causes the patch to release a cloud of seedlings that attach to
the creature. These seedlings disrupt spells as per the normal host patch.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Bar Fight
Magic doesn’t work right in Monk's Quarry. Spells cast go awry as
the magical energies sputter and fail. Years ago a traveling gypsy cursed
the village after an angry magic-user killed her son for messing around
with the mage's trollop of a daughter. The mother's jinx didn’t do much
more than scare the locals. However, the seed pods and pollen on the
gypsies’ traveling wagons infested the village with a quick-growing,
magic-consuming plant called witch grass.
The Magician's Wand is a two-story inn and tavern in the center of
town that caters to the needs of dusty travelers and thirsty locals. The
building is painted white and has a green sloping roof. The inn is run by
a fussy old woman named Madame Pritta who has no magical abilities.
Purple broad-leaf plants grow wildly about the building and throughout
the rest of the town. The purple plants are witch grass and can be found
all over town. The locals even pluck the strangely colored stems and roll
them into cigars to smoke. The cigars give off a sweet-smelling, cloying
smoke.
A gang of 12 greenskin orcs has been casing the tavern from the nearby
Kriegh Forest for the past week. The orcs don’t know about the town's
curse, and believe powerful magical items must be stored within the
Magician's Wand. The orcs are led by a brawny orc named Gredal who
has jangling earrings in his floppy ears and wears an eye-patch made of
cured dwarf skin. The orcs attack the inn head-on, charging through the
tavern doors and leaping through the windows. The orcs don’t rely on
spells, but any cast by the PCs may go awry because of the abundant
witch grass.

Witch Tree
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: 4 tendrils (1d6)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Constrict, spell-like abilities, resists electricity and fire
Move: 0 (immobile)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

A witch tree combines the features of a tall, beautiful woman and a willow
tree looking somewhat like a female willow treant. Her hair and fingers
form the fronds of the willow, while her arms and parts of her hair form
the branches. From a distance, the witch tree is almost indistinguishable
from a normal willow tree. Its skin is thick and dark, resembling the bark
of a tree. Its legs join together to form the roots. A witch tree attacks
with its tendrils. If two tendrils strike the same opponent, the tree grabs
the victim and constricts the creature for an automatic 2d6 damage each
round thereafter. A witch tree can employ various spell-like abilities:
5/day—charm monster; 2/day—charm person. A witch tree takes half
damage from fire and electrical attacks.

Bewitched
The villagers of Mydwich have vanished, all
40 people simply gone as if they never existed.
Footprints lead into the forest, where the muddy
ground still shows they docilely walked into
the willow trees that border the town. Homes
sit vacant, fires are nothing but embers in the
hearths, and meals sit rotting on wooden tables.
A few stray dogs roam in and out of the homes.
A lascivious woman sits dressed in sheer silks
sits atop the peak of one of the houses. She
holds a willow branch in her hands, caressing
the fronds lovingly. She seems deep in thought,
but aware of PCs entering the village. A bag of
willow branches and logs sits beside her on the
steep roof.
Aubrien is a dryad protector of the willow
trees around the village. She is an evil creature
who delights in the misfortune of others and took
revenge on the townsfolk for chopping down one of
the willows under her care. She has been going from
empty house to empty house collecting the remains of
the tree.
Aubrien lured a witch tree to her grove, and the deadly tree
– assisted by the dryad – lured the people of Mydwich into the plant's
grasping tendrils. Crushed bones litter the ground about the witch tree's
roots. The soil is a nutrient-rich mixture of dirt and blood, which Aubrien
scoops up and uses to lovingly fertilize the other willows in her grove.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Witherstench
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  2 claws (1d3)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Stench
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A witherstench (also called skunk beast) is a mutated relative of the
common skunk. It resembles a putrid yellow skunk with very little fur and
whose body is splotched with tiny, purple spots. It is about 4 feet long and
weighs around 50 pounds. Its diet consists of carrion, and the creature is
always found in areas where such “food” is plentiful.
Witherstenches shuns combat, but attacks if cornered, raking at their
opponents with their filthy claws.
A witherstench constantly emits a putrid stench that nearly every form
of animal life finds offensive. All living creatures (except witherstenches)
within 30 feet of a witherstench must succeed on a saving throw or be
nauseated (unable to attack, cast spells, concentrate on spells, or do
anything else requiring attention) for as long as they remain within 30
feet of the creature. Moving out of the affected area leaves the character
sickened (-2 to hit, weapon damage rolls and saving throws) for 1 round
after which time he recovers immediately.
Creatures that successfully save cannot be affected by the same
witherstench's stench for 24 hours. A neutralize poison spell removes the
effect from the sickened creature. Creatures with immunity to poison are
unaffected, and creatures resistant to poison receive their normal bonus
on their saving throws.

Credit: The Witherstench originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jonathon
Jones.

Irradiated and Irritated
A sandstone outcropping on the savannah holds a fantastic secret. The
sandstone sits atop a layer of uranium ore, and the entire outcropping
sits on top of granite bedrock. When inundated with groundwater, the
uranium begins a chain reaction that produces fission.
The waves of energy given off by the natural nuclear reactor have twisted
the surrounding flora and fauna. The plantlife is noticeably twisted and
stunted, and strange animals are common in the area - tigerillas in copses
of trees, owlephants on the savannah, cockatrices in the brush and a pack
of 3d4 witherstenches living in a cave near the outcropping.
The skunk beasts are left alone by the other mutants of the savannah.
More than a few magic-users have led expeditions to find the outcropping
and study it, with more than a few of their retainers and bearers falling
prey to the witherstench. Though the creatures have no use for the
treasure, the bodies are dragged to their caves, which now contain 1d12 x
100 sp, 1d4 x 100 gp, a broken terracotta vase and packs containing about
12 weeks of iron rations (poisonous to eat).

Witherweed
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  5 frond (1d4)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Death smoke, dexterity damage, camouflage
Move: 0 (immobile)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Witherweeds resemble large patches of dry grass and weeds and are
most often found in areas where their natural makeup allows them to
blend in with their surroundings. A subterranean version of this monster
exists and makes its lair in desolate caves and caverns.
Hidden among the creature's body are many long, sinewy strands that it
uses to trap its prey. The average witherweed covers an area of 20-square
feet, though specimens as large as 60-square feet have been encountered
by a few dungeon delvers.
A witherweed attacks any living creature that comes within 10 feet of
it, slashing and striking with its fronds. Slain creatures are devoured as
the witherweed releases enzymes to break down its food and absorbs the
nutrients.
A witherweed has one frond for each HD it possesses (thus, the typical
5 HD witherweed has 5 fronds while a 10 HD witherweed has 10 fronds).
A witherweed that takes at least 1 point of damage from a fire effect
releases a cloud of deadly smoke that billows forth and quickly fills a
20-foot radius surrounding it. Creatures within the area must succeed
on a saving throw vs. poison or take 2d6 points of damage. One minute
later, another saving throw must be made to avoid another 3d6 points of
damage.
The cloud remains for 1 round per HD of the witherweed but a strong
wind (21+ mph) disperses the cloud in 1 round.
An opponent struck by a witherweed's frond takes 1d4 points of
dexterity damage. A successful saving throw reduces the damage by half.
Since a witherweed looks like normal grass and weeds when at rest, it
surprises on a roll of 1-5 on 1d6 against most folks, and on a roll of 1-3
on 1d6 againast elves, druids and rangers and against dwarves against the
subterranean version.

Credit: The Witherweed originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Simon
Eaton.

Overgrown Mine
Ages ago, a clan of dwarves tunneled through a range of mountains,
linking a high lake around which they had constructed their mansions
to the lowlands, making it easier for them to bring their products to the
human markets beyond.
The tunnel is about 30 feet wide with an arched ceiling 30 feet tall. It
extends about 5 miles long and climbs a total of 800 feet from the bottom
to the top. Throughout the route are a number of drops of up to 30 feet
with pulley systems to move cargo and wide, spiral stairs to allow humans
leading animals to pass. There are also a number of side tunnels leading to
subterranean inns, storage areas, guard posts and shrines.
Alas, the days of caravans of sturdy mountain ponies moving fine
dwarven crafts through the tunnel are long since over. An over-ambitious
miner managed to connect his shaft to the lake, draining most of it into the
underworld, but a portion flowed through the caravan tunnel, drowning
hundreds of dwarves and making the high plateau quite uninhabitable.
Many dwarves hung on for a century or two tapping out their mines, but
most took the grim journey through the ruined tunnel into the human
lands beyond as refugees.
The dwarf tunnel is now mostly inhabited by bats, rats and the scourge
of witherweed, its vines clogging up stairwells and climbing the walls.
More than a few adventurers have killed themselves trying to burn the
stuff out of tunnels or stairwells. Perhaps there is an inn holding some
forgotten treasure left by a merchant or adventurer. Maybe something
unwholesome dwells in a forgotten shrine or one of the abandoned
manors overlooking the dry lake bed.

Wizard's Shackle
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  Bite (1 point plus spell drain)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Attach, spell drain, sense magic-users, sealed mind
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

The wizard's shackle is a 6-inch long, gray-green leech-like creature.
Though it is small in size, it is greatly feared by spellcasters, for its bite
drains arcane magic from a caster's mind. In some rare instances, evil
spellcasters have harvested these monsters and set them loose in an
enemy spellcaster's tower or laboratory.
A wizard's shackle attacks from ambush. It favors hiding on ledges,
bookshelves, doors, and other such places where it can drop on spellcasters
that pass underneath it. A wizard's shackle injects an anesthetic when it
bites, so it is possible that its bite goes unnoticed (only 1 in 6 chance of
noticing).
If a wizard's shackle hits with a bite attack, it latches onto the
opponent's body. The wizard's shackle holds on with great tenacity. An
attached wizard's shackle can be struck with a weapon or removed with a
successful open doors check.
A wizard's shackle drains spells when attached to a magic-user. Each
round the wizard's shackle remains attached, it drains 1d6 levels of
prepared spells or unused spell slots, beginning with the highest level
spell or slot available. For example, on a roll of 4 against a 5th-level
magic-user, a wizard's shackle drains four levels of prepared spells. The
magic-user currently has one 3rd-level spell, two 2nd-level spells, and
three 1st-level spells prepared. The wizard's shackle drains the 3rd-level
spell and one of the 1st-level spells (determined randomly).
A creature drained of spells or slots can attempt a saving throw with a
+2 bonus to notice that something is wrong, though unless he searches
his body, he might still overlook the wizard's shackle. Once a wizard's
shackle has drained at least 4 spell levels, it detaches and crawls away to
digest its meal. Lost spells or slots are regained the next day.
A wizard's shackle can automatically detect the location of any arcane
spellcaster within 30 feet. This functions as a detect evil spell.
Wizard's shackles are immune to mind-influencing spells and effects.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Wait, What's on Your Neck?
The coasts of a lonely wilderness are home to a strange marsh, quite
unlike any other. The coasts consist of a range of limestone mounts terribly ancient and quite worn down. Weathering has left these hills
looking worm eaten, with hundreds of caves joining the highlands to the
shore. Over the centuries, these limestone caverns have really become
more like a series of sodden shelves connected by natural arches and
tunnels. The sodden, opened vaults are like tiny marshes connected via
ground water and waterfalls, the fresh water eventually straining through
the stone and reaching the sea.
All manner of fish, frogs, marsh birds and rodents live in these quiet,
sheltered marshes. A tribe of 1d6 x 100 kobolds hunts the marshes,
dwelling in small burrows and never appearing in groups larger than ten
- the kobolds are all linked by blood, and females are swapped between
family groups, but they otherwise distrust and despise one another.
The most interesting creature in these marshes is the wizard's shackle.
Those traveling up or down the marshy shelves have a 1 in 6 chance of
running into a swarm of 1d6+5 wizard's shackles each hour. The kobolds
are canny enough to recognize when a magic-user has been drained
of spells - they have a certain look in their eyes - and will wait for the
feeding to be complete before they launch an ambush.

Wolf, Abyssal
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8+1)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: Paralyzing gaze
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

The abyssal wolf is a man-sized wolf that stands 5 feet tall at the
shoulder. It has deep blackish-blue fur and eyes of fiery orange. Its coat
is usually caked with blood, and bits of flesh hang from its toothy mouth.
Anyone within 40 feet meeting the gaze of an abyssal wolf must save or
be paralyzed for 2d4 rounds. The wolf's keen sense of smell lets it detect
prey within 60 feet, or 120 feet if opponents are upwind.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Let Slip the Dogs
Partiers fill the Sable Manse for Midsummer's Feast, the women's
flowing party gowns swirls of garish color on the marble dance floor
beneath floating green paper globes burning with soft orange candlelight.
The sultan Reysis II sits loftily on his pillowed throne, exhorting the
dancers to grander sweeps and bows in his honor. For this night is all
about him, a birthday party to end all parties, where the wine flows freely,
the women are beautiful and the morning is a long ways off.
And it might just be the last party, as a stranger now walks through the
lavish halls, his multicolored robe drinking in the revelry around him and
reflecting it back a thousandfold. The tall stranger stands every inch of
7 feet tall and covers his features with a white porcelain mask decorated
with sparkling gemstones. His eyes are afire with mirth at the pomp going
on around him as he travels through each decorated hall, grabbing at the
women and tasting every drop of fruity wine. Darnyl Bloog is a wanted
man, and knows this could well be his last night to enjoy the pleasures of
the land. So he's making the most of his last days by sneaking into Reysis’
monthly celebration
Bloog isn’t being sought by any law local enforcement. He's the
half-son of a demonic matron of Hell, and he's heard the baying of the
hounds of his mother's rival coming for him for the past week. But he's
not going down without one last revel. It's just too bad that the Grand
Hunting Hounds of Entrium have found him before the party's last dance.
The 6 monstrous hounds, led by a reddish-colored abyssal wolf named
Gnawbone, burst into the reception like the party crashers they are, intent
on their prey … or anyone who gets in their way.

Wolf, Ghoul
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4+1
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (1d6 plus paralysis)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Paralysis, undead, surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 5/240

Ghoul wolves are carnivorous undead wolves that delight in hunting
living creatures, catching them, and tearing them to shreds. These
creatures are most often found haunting desolate moors and marshes.

They hunt in packs, surrounding their prey and circling as they move in
for the kill.

Those hit by a ghoul wolf's bite must succeed on a saving throw or be
paralyzed for 1d4+2 rounds. Elves are immune to this paralysis.

Copyright Notice: Authors Clark Peterson and Scott Greene.

Blight Below the Demon's Peak
In an alpine landscape there is a small village of herdsmen. Looking
down on the village there is a crooked, snow-covered mountain called
Demon's Peak. Located halfway between the mountain and the village
there is a small shrine carved into the mountain and faced with red marble.
The shrine was tended by a hermit and contained an ancient clay tablet
inscribed with glyphs of power. These glyphs kept the terrible secrets of
the mountain hidden until a band of raiders (or adventurers) forced their
way into the shrine and absconded with the tablet.

One the tablet was removed, the foul energies inside the Demon's Peak
let loose a contagion on the valley below. With the streams poisoned,
the cattle died away and those people who did not flee the valley were
struck with a debilitating disease approximating mummy rot. The people,
now afraid to spread their contagion elsewhere, survive by gathering
mushroom and roots from the meadows and woodlands in the valley.

They all dwell in the parish house in the village, barring entry to others
for fear of infecting them.

At night, a mob of 1d3+1 dire ghoul wolves and 2d4 ghoul wolves
prowl the valley in search of victims.

Dire Ghoul Wolf
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12+1
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack: Bite (2d6 plus paralysis)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Paralysis, undead, surprise on 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaos
CL/XP: 13/2300

Dire ghoul wolves resemble their lesser kin, but are much larger. Those
hit by a dire ghoul wolf's bite must succeed on a saving throw or be
paralyzed for 1d4+2 rounds. Even elves can be affected by a dire ghoul
wolf's paralysis.

Copyright Notice: Authors Clark Peterson and Scott Greene.

Wolf, Shadow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack:  Ghostly bite (1d4 strength)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Incorporeal, strength damage, shadow blend
Move: 18
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Shadow wolves are large black hounds formed of darkness. Their eyes
burn with a crimson fire. Shadow wolves are nocturnal hunters and hate
all living creatures. Their eyes flash with a crimson fire when prey is
sighted.
Shadow wolves prefer to attack from ambush, using the shadows and
darkness to their advantage. When prey wanders nearby, a shadow wolf
leaps to the attack. A shadow wolf pack leads its prey into an ambush and
then strikes when opponents are completely unaware.
As incorporeal creatures, a shadow wolf can only be harmed by magic
weapons and magic spells like magic missile. Likewise, their ghostly
bites ignore bonuses to Armor Class due to armor.
The bite of a shadow wolf deals 1d4 points of strength damage to a
living foe. A creature reduced to strength 0 dies.
In any condition of illumination other than full daylight, a shadow wolf
can disappear into the shadows, making it impossible to see. Attacks
against a shadow wolf hidden in shadow are made at a -10 penalty to
hit. Artificial illumination, even a light spell, does not negate this ability.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Shadowy Red Herrings
A band of rat-faced assassins has taken up residence in the slimy,
limestone catacombs beneath a tropical city-state. The assassins are led
by an aggressive, cold-blooded magic-user with coffee-colored skin,
green eyes and dark brown hair hidden beneath a white wig. Tall and
pinched-faced, the man poses as a physician by day and runs his small
guild at night.
The assassins have been hired by the local patriarch to bump off a
rival theologian. They are currently exploring the catacombs for one that
might allow them access to the theologian's townhouse. To cover their
explorations, the magic-user has simmoned a pack of 1d8+4 shadow
wolves. The wolves have been terrorizing the city-state at night and then
hustling back into the catacombs by day to protect the assassins.
The physician/assassin works and lives in a gray, brick building with
marble accents near the city hall. He keeps a coffer (locked, trapped with
a poisoned needle) hidden in his wardrobe. The coffer contains 1d6 x
1,000 gp and a piece of rose quartz worth 1d10 x 100 gp.

Wolf-in-Sheep's-Clothing
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 9
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack: 7 tentacles (1d4), bite (2d4)
Saving Throw: 7
Special: Constriction, all-around vision, lure-growth
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1400

The wolf-in-sheep's clothing is perhaps the single strangest monster
adventurers have encountered to date. It appears as a gray-brown tree
stump about 3-4 feet in diameter. Two 10-foot long eyestalks protrude
from the creature's base. Each eyestalk is brownish-green in color and
is topped by a violet flower-like eye. Seven to ten root tentacles, blackbrown in color, give the monster its means of locomotion. Its mouth is
located on its trunk-like body and appears to be nothing more than a deep
scar, except when the creature opens it. The mouth is lined with razorsharp and jagged greenish-white teeth. Its strangest and perhaps deadliest
characteristic is its ability to “sprout” a growth on its top that resembles
a small furry animal (such as a rabbit or squirrel). The wolf-in-sheep's
clothing uses this ability to lure in its prey, when it strikes with deadly
force and aim.
The wolf-in-sheep's-clothing uses its lure-growth ability to draw in prey.
When a creature moves within 10 feet of the wolf-in-sheep's-clothing, it
lashes out with a tentacle. If it hits, the victim must succeed at a saving
throw or be grabbed and constricted for 1d4 points of damage per round.
A grabbed victim is dragged to the monster's mouth and bitten until dead.
A tentacle has 10 hp and can be attacked by making a successful
attack against an Armor Class of 2 [17]. Severing a tentacle deals no
damage to a wolf-in-sheep's-clothing. Severed tentacles grow back in
1d4 weeks.
The wolf-in-sheep's-clothing's 7-foot long eyestalks allow it to look in
any direction, thereby making it nearly impossible to surprise or attack
from behind.

Credit: The Wolf-In-Sheep's-Clothing originally appeared in the First Edition
module S3 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1980)
and later in the First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/ Wizards of the Coast,
1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Disturbing the Peace
On a long, forested island there are two villages. One belongs to a
gangly race of men with reddish-brown skin and narrow, close-set eyes
while the other belongs to a race of men with black skin, angular faces
and cornflower blue eyes. The two peoples do not care for one another,
and their respective rulers are convinced that the “others” wish to conquer
the entire island.
The island is rich in tin, and a nearby kingdom, just across the straits,
has an interest in keeping those mines open and productive. To this end,
they have negotiated an unsteady peace and placed a small army on the
island to maintain it.
The army consists of 20 crossbowmen, 50 pikemen and a squadron
of 10 light horsemen. It is led by a stately old knight with dark brown
skin, curly, reddish hair and walnut-colored eyes. The knight and his
army occupy the heights at the center of the island. The heights are in
a defensible position and nearby, in the middle of their camp, there is a
fresh water spring. A single, well worn path connects the two villages and
runs very near the camp. The knight has posted sentries on the road every
night since the army took up residence, but in the past week they have
been disappearing.
The villagers, of course, blame each other and tensions have grown
particularly high. The actual culprit is a wolf-in-sheep's-clothing. It and
its ancestors have dwelled on the forested island for centuries and, though
they have taken a few villagers (probably the cause of the enmity between
the villages) they mostly prey on the island's wolves, badgers and hawks.

Spider, Wolf
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack: Bite (1d8 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Poison, web, surprise on roll of 1-3 on 1d6 when in
their webs
Move: 15/9 (climbing)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A wolf spider appears as a large monstrous spider with the head
of a wolf. Its eyes are multifaceted like a spider's, and its fangs are
complimented by a set of spider-like mandibles. Wolf-spiders are very
territorial creatures and hunt their prey, kill it, and drag it back to their
web lair. Wolf-spiders speak the language of goblins and might speak the
common tongue.
A wolf-spider delivers a debilitating poison with a successful bite attack.
Victims must pass a saving throw or suffer 1d6 points of strength damage.
Wolf-spiders can throw a web eight times per day. This is similar to
an attack with a net but has a maximum range of 50 feet and is effective
against targets up to hill giant size. An entangled creature can escape with
a successful open doors check.
Wolf-spiders often create sheets of sticky webbing up to 30 feet square.
They position these sheets to snare flying creatures but can also use them
to trap prey on the ground. Approaching creatures have a 1 in 6 chance to
notice a web (2 in 6 for elves). Otherwise they stumble into it and become
trapped as though by a successful web attack. Each web has 12 hp.
A wolf-spider can move across its own web at its climb speed and can
pinpoint the location of any creature touching its web.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson.

Rescue the Princess
There is a small native village over the next rise, beneath steep chalk
cliffs pocked with small caves and home to a colony of brightly colored
birds (or are they feathered reptiles) making a cacophony of shrieks and
screeches. The villagers live on the shores of a placid lagoon of bluegreen water so crystal clear it is like looking through a glass to the white
sands below. Swimming in the lagoon are a shiver of five tiger sharks.
In the midst of the lagoon there is a weathered pillar of basalt - natural,
and rising about seven feet above the surface of the lagoon. To long
walkways lead out to the pillar from either shore. Standing on the pillar
are two men, their ochre skin glistening in the noon sun. At a signal from
a man in a feathered cloak and headdress on the shore, the men begin to
wrestle. If the adventurers do not interfere, one of the men eventually is
thrown into the water and torn limb from limb by the sharks. At this, a
maiden on the shore gives out a terrible shriek. When the victor reaches
the shore, he takes the woman by the wrist, gives the man in the feathered
cloak a hard stare and heads for a cave in the cliffs.
The victor is under the control of a powerful witch doctor, and the
witch doctor shall soon have his prize. Inside his subterranean lair he is
preparing a ritual that will summon forth the demon queen of poisonous
things from the Abyss, and all he lacked was a maiden of royal blood
and a new moon. The maiden is now in his possession and the new moon
comes tonight.
The witch doctor's lair is a collection of three caves, each larger than the
first. The first cave is smallish and trapped with poisoned darts set off by
a tripwire. The second has smooth walls painted with images of horror.
This is an echo chamber that magnifies every sound twenty fold (and
triples sonic damage of any kind). The final chamber is the witch doctor's
lair, which he shares with two large wolf-spiders, envoys of the demon
queen. One is usually stationed above the entrance, the other by the witch
doctor, allowing the old man to stroke its bristles and ruffle the fur on its
neck. During the ritual, the controlled warrior is present and the maiden
will be suspended over a beating human heart on the ground, the heart
surrounded by silver powder tracing out a magic circle. When the ritual
is completed, the demon queen's essence will flow up from the heart and
into the maiden. In four rounds, the transformation is complete.
The chieftain (the man in the feathered cloak) is distraught over losing
his daughter and the finest warrior in his tribe. He cannot help but believe
there was trickery involved, and should he catch sight of the outsiders, he
will beg for their help. His people know that the witch dcotor's caves are
taboo, and they will not enter. In return he offers his daughter's hand in
marriage and half of his kingdom.

Woodwose
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 weapon (1d8) or 2 fists (1d4)
Saving Throw: 10
Special: Spells, spines, immune to wooden weapons and
plant-based spells
Move: 9
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Woodwose are green gnarled old men with skin-like tree bark and moss
beards. A woodwose can cause sharpened wooden spines to protrude from
its body that deal 1d6 points of damage to any creature in contact with or
holding the woodwose. Woodwose cast spells as 5th-level clerics. They
are immune to wooden weapons (such as clubs) and plant-based spells.

Wood Woes

Dark clouds the color of a bruise fester over the dead forest, spitting
jagged streaks of lightning that burst the decaying tree trunks in explosive
blasts of brittle bark. Trees crash and fall with booms that echo loudly
through the leafless oaks and elms. In the middle of a clearing, a dryad
is strapped with coarse vines to two stout broken branches crossed into
an ‘X’. The dryad Idylia struggles weakly against her bonds. A line of
salt forms a perfect circle around the woman. On the far side of the
clearing, a crude lean-to of split branches and dead leaves sits against
the gnarled wood of a dead elm. Vines draped over the single entry
form a makeshift curtain.
This dead area in the Kajaani Forest used to be alive and beautiful
under the protection of a dryad, but a vengeful woodwose changed
all that. The angry forest creature captured the dryad and tortures the
beautiful creature as the forest decays around her. The crude crucifix
holding her is all that remains of her tree.
The woodwose lives in the lean-to, but often can be found capering
through the dead trees. His bark-like skin lets him hide in plain sight
among the dying trees simply by standing still. Idylia will last just a
few more hours under the woodwose's ministrations.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Yellow Musk Creeper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack: Pollen spray (see below) or 2 tendrils (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Create yellow musk zombie, intelligence damage,
pollen spray, rejuvenation
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The yellow musk creeper is a slow-moving plant that attacks living creatures
and feeds on their intelligence, eventually turning such creatures into yellow
musk zombies. Creepers can be found in moderate to warm climates or
underground, and are rarely encountered elsewhere.

The plant is a large, green clinging vine with ivy-like leaves of dark green.
Small, dark green bulbs and bright yellow flowers mottled with purple adorn
the plant. The actual root of the plant is a large bulbous, brown sac that
lies beneath the surface of the ground where the yellow musk creeper grows.

Yellow musk creepers lie silent until prey approaches within 10 feet.
The small flowers of the creeper then puff a musky-smelling fine powder
at a single target, attempting to entrance the target. If attacked, a yellow
musk creeper lashes out with its tendrils.

Yellow musk creepers are never encountered alone. They always have
a retinue of yellow musk zombies with them. These zombies will defend
the creeper against all attacks.

A yellow musk creeper can spray a tiny cloud of hypnotic pollen at a single
creature within 30 feet. An opponent hit by the cloud must succeed on a saving
throw or be entranced for 1d4 minutes (as by a charm monster spell). Entranced
creatures can take no action other than to move to the yellow musk creeper. An
entranced creature resists any attempt to halt its progress. A victim within
reach of the yellow musk creeper stands there and offers no resistance to the
monster's attacks.

A yellow musk creeper can insert hundreds of tiny roots into the head of an
entranced foe within any space occupied by the creeper. An entranced foe does
not resist this attack and does not receive a saving throw to break free of
its entranced state. This attack deals 1d4 points of intelligence damage each
round. A victim reduced to intelligence 0 becomes a yellow musk zombie under
the control of the creeper that created it in 1 hour (see that entry in this
book).

The transformation can be prevented by the casting of neutralize poison
followed by a restoration spell.  A yellow musk creeper can be killed only if
its root is dug up, then burned, hacked apart, or otherwise destroyed.
Reducing the creeper to 0 or less hp puts it out of commission, allowing
excavation of its roots. The main root has an AC of 1 [18] and 10 hp. As long
as the root remains intact, a yellow musk creeper regrows in about 2 weeks.

Credit: The Yellow Musk Creeper originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Albie
Fiore.

Do Not Sniff the Yellow Flowers!
In the midst of a jungle there is a low depression with fairly steep,
rocky sides covered with green vines of yellow and purple flowers. The
vines extend into the depression and partially obscure a giant stone head
with a demonic face. The stone head was carved for a stone golem that
was never completed (or, for a more challenging encounter, a stone
golem that was completed and activated and is now buried just under the
surface of the depression.
The vines belong, of course, a yellow musk creeper. Its 1d6 yellow
musk zombies are stationed in the jungle around the depression. It's not
uncommon for a band of adventurers to be “herded” by the zombies into
the depression and the waiting tendrils of their master.
The stone head contains a crystal matrix composed of a ruby, sapphire,
emerald and diamond encased in a golden sphere. Each jewel is worth
1,000 gp and the gold sphere is worth 500 gp.


Yellowjacket, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: bite (1d3) or sting (1d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Poison, pheromone
Move: 1/20 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Giant yellowjackets are 8 feet long with alternating bands of black and
yellow on their thorax and abdomen. Workers generally have thicker
black bands than the queen or soldiers. The yellowjacket's stinger is
slightly curved and barbed and their mandibles are well-formed and
developed, allowing them to chew their food. They attack by biting foes,
saving its sting unless confronting a more powerful opponent. If attacked,
a giant yellowjacket releases a pheromone that makes all yellowjackets in
the area more aggressive (+1 to attack, damage).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Apple Orchard
The branches of a dozen blossoming apple trees hang low with ripe
fruit. On the ground around the trunks, daisies, peonies and lilies grow
rampant. Bloody chunks of meat are scattered among the flowers, the
barely identifiable flesh sliced and diced into gory pieces. A goblin lies
in the bushes, its head severed at the neck, and one leg missing entirely.
Blood pools in thick puddles under the grasses. A massive 15-foot-long
snake skeleton is wrapped around the upper branches of one of the apple
trees. The orchard is the home of a nest of giant yellowjackets that drove
the giant snake from its underground burrow and moved in. The snake
was slaughtered in the tree where it crawled to escape, and its flesh used to
feed the young yellowjackets. The yellowjackets live in the underground
warrens, and send 12 warriors out to attack anyone wandering around the
insects’ food sources.

Yeti
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Cold, frightful gaze, squeeze, immunity to cold,
double damage from fire, surprise on roll of 1-4 on 1d6 in
snowy areas
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A yeti is a large, hulking humanoid covered in white, shaggy fur. Its
hands end in razor-sharp claws. The yeti's head is large and sports a
large round mouth filled with fangs. The typical yeti stands 9 feet tall and
weighs 600 or more pounds.
Yetis make their lairs in remote mountains and hills. They are fierce
predators with ravenous appetites, dining on mountain goats, sheep and
humanoids. They are particularly fond of human and elf flesh.
Creatures within 30 feet that meet the eyes of a yeti must succeed on a
saving throw or stand paralyzed in fear (treat as a hold person spell) for 3
rounds. A creature that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the
frightful gaze of that yeti for one day.
A yeti's body generates intense cold, dealing 1d6 points of damage to
those that contact it for at least one round. An opponent hit by both of
a yeti's claw attacks in the same round must pass a saving throw or be
squeezed for 2d6 points of damage (plus 1d6 points of cold damage) each
round the hold is maintained. The victim can escape with an open doors
check.

Credit: The Yeti originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Everyone Knows They Bounce
An ancient stone lamaserie is constructed on cliffs overlooking a
sprawling village. The lamaserie and village are located on a high
plateau inhabited by blue-furred tigers, takins, gazelles, cranes and snow
chickens.
The villagers keep goats and yaks and grow fields of barley during
their short growing season. The village is ruled by a brotherhood of
1d10+3 monks who dwell in a newer, smaller monastery within the
village. The lama is a 6th level monk named Shamar, a stately, elderly
gentleman with kind eyes and a sharp nose and chin.
The old lamaserie is a sprawling complex with tall walls that have,
over hundreds of winters, developed deep cracks and partially tumbled
to the bottom of the cliff. The lamaserie is two-stories tall and has an
enclosed courtyard and a three-story stone watchtower. Stairs wind up
the side of the cliffs connecting the lamaserie to the village. The stairs
climb 60 feet and are often slick with ice or moisture.
The lamaserie is now inhabited by 1d6+3 yeti. They have made a few
raids into the village and the monks are preparing a response, though
they would much rather hire a band of adventurers to do it for them.

Zombie, Brine
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack: Cutlass (1d6) or fists (1d4)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Resistance to fire (50%)
Move: 12/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A brine zombie appears as a rotting humanoid dressed in tattered and
ragged clothing. Its semi-bloated body glistens from the slimy mixture of
water and seaweed that hangs from its form. The creature's rotting flesh is
blue-green in color. No semblance of life burns in its eyes.
Brine zombies are the remnants of a ship's crew that has perished at sea.
They are mindless creatures, not very pleasant to look at, and relentless in
their attacks on the living. The spark of evil that brought them back from
the ocean depths drives them to seek the living so they may join them in
their watery graves. Brine zombies appear much as they did in life.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Revenge Is a Dish Best Served Briny
Every year, dozens of ships laden with spices enter the ports along
the jungle coast, dropping their cargo and picking up timber and exotic
birds for the desert kingdoms across the sea. The prince of the coast is
a generous man with those who serve him loyally, but he is merciless
toward those he suspects of betrayal.
So it was, a month ago, that the Kingfish left the port with a load of
ironwood and a bit of sabotage. It went down about 10 miles off shore
and its crew has been walking along the bottom ever since to enact their
revenge on the prince and his precious city.
On the night of a visit by a band of adventurers (such bad luck), 40
brine zombies will rise from the waters and do their best to destroy
the city. Their first target is the local temple and the clerics. After that,
they’ll cut a road of red ruin through the village on their way to the
palace.

Zombie, Corpsespun
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: weapon or strike (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Poisonous spider bites, immune to sleep and charm
spells
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Corpsespun zombies are the victims of a corpsespinner, whose poison
animates the dead as an automaton sheathed in webs. The victim's
insides are replaced by thousands of tiny spiders crawling over its
body and into and out of its ears, eyes, and mouth. These spiders take
over and devour the insides of the creature, but keep it moving with a
semblance of its former self. Corpsespun zombies transfer 1d4 spiders
with each attack to their foes. Each spider delivers a weak poison that
does 1 point of damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Spider Piñata
Four figures shamble through the thick webs filling this rocky cavern,
their slow gait marking them as zombies even before the rotten meat
stench of death betrays them. Thousands of spiders crawl across their
bodies, and move in and out of their gaping wounds. Hanging in the
center of the chamber is a giant spider, its body shriveled and its legs
curling against its drooping abdomen. The spider is tangled in its webs
and obviously dead. The corpsepun zombies have infested nearly every
nook and cranny of the room with their spiders, and the dead spider is
filled to bursting with the small arachnids. Anyone pushing the spider
aside to get to the zombies causes the spider to burst like a piñata,
showering the PCs with hundreds of venomous corpsepun spiders. Each
PC within 10 feet is covered in 3d6 spiders that swarm over the victim as
the zombies close in and attack.

Zombie, Juju
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [16]
Attack:  Weapon or fists (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: +1 magic to-hit, climb, immune mental/elec/cold/force, half dmg fire/bludge/pierce
Move: 12
Alignment: Chaos
Challenge Level/XP: 5/340

A juju zombie looks like a desiccated humanoid with amber, leathery
flesh. It is dressed in filthy rags, and its eyes are small pinpoints of crimson
light. An odor of death hangs in the air around the creature.
Juju zombies’ hatred of living creatures and the magic that created
them are what hold them to the world of the living. When a humanoid
or monstrous humanoid is slain by an energy drain or a similar spell or
spell-like ability, it may rise as a juju zombie.

Can climb like crazy.

Credit: The Juju Zombie originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

All-Seeing Eye of Mojango
The swamp holds many terrors and strangenesses, none more terrible
than the All-Seeing Eye of Mojango. The eye is actually a sphere of
smooth, black stone (unidentifiable, even by dwarves). It is placed in a
tree top and gives off arcs of purple and gold light that have the ability
to hypnotize the weak-minded. If touched, the sphere drains 1d4 levels
(a saving throw is permitted to reduce this to 1 level). Those that have
had levels drained by the sphere have their eyes turn purple and gain the
ability to see in darkness for one month.
Many adventurers have come across the Eye, and its location in the
swamp seems to change from sighting to sighting. Wherever the Eye
appears, its “handmaidens” appear as well, a troupe of 1d4+1 juju
zombies, past victims of the object.

Zombie, Spellgorged
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 8 [11], or 7[12] with shield
Attacks: weapon or strike (1d8)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Immune to sleep and charm spells, store spells, spell
conflagration
Move: 6
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A spellgorged zombie is a zombie crafted from the corpse of a Magic-User or
Cleric to serve as a ring of spell storing. Spells can be cast directly into
the zombie's mouth to store them until needed. A spellgorged zombie can store
1d6 spells (either Magic-User or Cleric).  The zombie's creator can cause the
zombie to explode by detonating the stored spells in a blast that does 4d6
points of damage to all within 20 feet (save for half).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Spell Bombs
A line of shambling 10 zombies wanders into Loodis, their shuffling
gait slowed by a leather strap tied around their waists. The ropes link the
undead to a skeletal kathlin walking behind them. A robed figure rides on
the back of the six-legged horse.

Xun Marush is a 10th-level magic-user who controls the line of spellgorged
zombies. He stores his spells in the undead. If outnumbered, Xun unhooks
a zombie from the horse's saddle, and lets it shamble forward before he
detonates it. Xun rides into towns and demands gold to leave. He detonates
a number of the undead if he has to just to show his power.

Zombie, Yellow Musk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: Weapon (1d8) or fists (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Link to creator, sprout new creeper
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A yellow musk zombie has pale yellow skin and stark white eyes. Its
clothes hang in tatters around its decaying form. Despite being called
zombies, they are not undead and cannot be turned or controlled by
clerics.

After about 2 months of service to a yellow musk creeper, the yellow
musk zombie wanders up to 1 mile away from its creator (the link
to creator is broken) and dies. Where it falls, new yellow musk
seedlings sprout from its head and the corpse, take root, and within
one hour, a new fully grown yellow musk creeper blossoms.

Credit: The Yellow Musk Zombie originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Albie
Fiore.


Archerfish, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Water spray
Move: 15 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Giant archerfish are 3 feet long and have silver-colored bodies with
vertical black stripes that begin just behind the head and fade as they near
the tail. Their eyes are either cloudy blue or silver and its fins are slightly
darker than its body. Some species of giant archer fish are yellowishgray with dark-colored eyes, but all have the vertical black stripes. Giant
archerfish can grow to be 5 feet long. The archerfish can shoot a jet of
water up to 30 feet to knock prey into the water (save to avoid).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

One Fish, Two Fish, Big Fish . . .
Bigger Fish
The canal city of Venexia is a marvel of engineering, with buildings
built on hundreds of small islands. Arching stone bridges cross the canals
that wind through the city. Open boats poled through the canals allow
residents to get from landing to landing. Low railings along the canals are
designed more for show than to keep people from falling into the waters.
Landings scattered throughout the city allow the shallow rafts to dock and
take on passengers.
People are scared to go near the water, however, and those who must use
the boats do so quickly. Residents speak of the “killer fish” in the canals
that spit water and then swallow people whole. Signs posted about the
city offer a 10 gp reward per “killer fish” caught, with a crude drawing
of the archerfish.
Twenty giant archerfish did indeed recently swim into the canal system,
and the aggressive fish attack anyone standing along the canals or poling
the boats that ply the waters. But the archerfish so far haven’t killed
anything besides a few pets that got too close to the water's edge. The
real culprits are six sharks that followed the tasty archerfish treats into
the canals. People knocked off boats and bridges by the archerfish end up
splashing in the water, which draws the hungry sharks.

Axe Beak
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack:  2 claws (1d6) and bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

The axe beak is a prehistoric flightless,
carnivorous bird that resembles a 7-foot tall
ostrich. It is an aggressive hunter and has a strong,
thick neck and a sharp beak. The axe beak makes
a honking noise that can be heard clearly up to one-half
mile away. An axe beak lair contains 1d4 eggs worth 50-80 gp each.
Hatchlings fetch the same value on the market. The creatures attack by
kicking and biting. It is a very aggressive hunter and runs down its prey
should an opponent flee. If extremely hungry, an axe beak attacks until it
or its prey is dead.

Credit: The Axe Beak originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Looking for a Nest Egg
Beneath an umbrella tree on a plain of yellowish grasses a female axe
beak stands guard over her flock's egg pit. The dominant hen of the flock,
she is highly aggressive in the defense of the 1d4+1 eggs buried in the
pit, and enjoys a +1 bonus to hit and damage while fighting for them. Any
aggressive action brings a chorus of honking that attracts the other 1d4+1
members of her flock. The local halflings have made the stealing of these
eggs something of a cottage industry, and as a result the birds now attack
small humanoids on sight and in preference to taller humanoids. One such
halfling, a thief of little note, has been treed in the umbrella tree and
is desperate for rescue. He claims he has a treasure map that he's quite
willing to share if only the adventurers extract him from his predicament.

Barracuda, Small
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: None
Move: 0/27 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 1/15

The barracuda is a predatory fish that averages about 2 feet long and weighs
10-15 pounds. Its body is bluish-gray near the front changing to silver
mottled with black spots in the rear. Its mouth is filled with razorsharp
teeth.  The barracuda strikes quickly in combat. Slain prey is devoured
immediately.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Barracuda, Medium
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: None
Move: 0/27 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 4/120

The Medium barracuda is a predatory fish that averages 6 feet long and weigh
30-45 pounds.  Its body is bluish-gray near the front changing to silver
mottled with black spots in the rear. Its mouth is filled with razorsharp
teeth.  The barracuda strikes quickly in combat. Slain prey is devoured
immediately.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Barracuda, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: None
Move: 0/27 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 7/600

The Large barracuda is a predatory fish that averages 10 feet long and weigh
50-80 pounds. Its body is bluish-gray near the front changing to silver
mottled with black spots in the rear. Its mouth is filled with razorsharp
teeth.  The barracuda strikes quickly in combat. Slain prey is devoured
immediately.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Battery or Barracuda
Just off the shore of a busy river port there is a popular tavern and inn
called the The Battery. The Battery is composed of the remains of a small
watch tower, with additions constructed of wood on a wooden platform
held aloft by posts driven into the sea floor.

The Battery is run by a foul-mouthed old pirate the locals call Corvey
(though few believe that he was ever a pirate). The Battery serves
fortified wines, grog and dark, bitter ales, along with a wide variety of
seafood. The cook (who people are positive has goblin blood flowing
through her veins) makes a habit of tossing scraps out her window into
the sea. This chum attracts schools of 1d6+5 barracudas (of whichever
size you desire). Rumor has it that Corvey throws troublemakers to these
barracuda, watching their struggles from a wicker chair set next to a bay
window (and the rumors are true!)

Brontotherium
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: Gore (2d6+2)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Trample
Move: 9
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 11/1,700

Ogres riding brontotherium guard the warship on each side. Equipped
with oversized lances, these ogres use the brontotherium's forked horns
to guide the lances with uncanny precision.
Where the ogres found the ship and what they plan to do with it are
unclear.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Brontotheriums weigh two tons, are about 14 feet long, and stand
eight feet tall at the shoulder. They have dark brown or grayish-brown
fur. Brontotheriums are herd animals and charge foes to gore them with
their massive horn. If the herd is in danger, the animals charge, trampling
opponents for 4d6 points of damage (save for half).

Crossing the Ice
Herds of wild brontotherium scatter before an ironbound warship
being pulled slowly across the frozen tundra. The aged ship sits atop a
crude wagon sled pulled by a team of domesticated brontotherium. Ogre
handlers wrapped in furs walk alongside the massive beasts, leading them
across the icy ground.
The Kintok ogre clan found the ship abandoned on a mountainside
and is carting it toward the sea nearly 80 miles away. The centuries old
warship remains stout and seaworthy. It is equipped with an operable
catapult and several ballistae. Ogres walk the decks of the slow-moving
vessel. A number of rocks sit on the deck, ready to be loaded into the
catapults. Sharpened tree trunks serve as missiles for the ballistae.

Caribe, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Frenzy
Move: 0/15 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

The giant caribe is a rare form of giant saltwater piranha. They are pale
bluish-green in color and about 6 feet long, though larger specimens have
been encountered.
Giant caribes attack by swarming an opponent and biting with their
razor-sharp teeth. Once blood is drawn, the entire pack goes into a frenzy,
attacking twice each round and gaining a 1 point bonus to Armor Class.
Frenzied giant caribes attack until either they or their opponents are dead.
A giant caribe can notice creatures by scent in a 90-foot radius and
detect blood in the water at ranges of up to 500 feet.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

In the Shadow of Truth
The head waters of a tropical river are home not only to river dolphins,
an aquatic form of pseudodragon and crocodiles, but also schools of 5d6
giant caribes, the apex predator of the river. A number of barges move up
and down the river, carrying supplies to the villages and market towns
along the river and bringing back timber and tropical fruits.
Aside from the giant caribes, the most famous thing about the river is
a tall, bronze post that rises about 15 feet above the surface of the water.
Suspended from the top of the post by a chain is a gleaming morningstar.
Folk tales tell of the time that the pillar rose from the water amidst a
shower of multi-colored sparks. The locals believe it was set there by a
devil as a temptation, and many have succumbed to the caribes trying to
claim the prize.
The morningstar is a +1 weapon. Creatures hit with the morningstar
must pass a saving throw or be shrouded in shadow - essentially making
them appear to be a shadow and completely blinding them. The bearer of
the morningstar gains the ability to see in the dark, but loses the ability
to tell truth from deception. Whether the morningstar is the product of
deviltry is unknown, but likely considering its powers.

Catfish, Giant Electric
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attacks: Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Electric discharge, swallow whole
Move: 9 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

Giant electric catfish are about 8 feet long but can grow to lengths of
12 feet or more. Its bloated body is generally gray or grayish-brown in
color fading to a dull white or cream color on its underbelly. Its eyes are
small and its snout wide and round. Three sets of barbels (or feelers) are
located around its mouth. Unlike many fish, a giant electric catfish has
no dorsal fin. Once every 1d4 rounds, a giant electric catfish can produce
an electrical charge that deals 2d6 points of damage (save for half) to
everything within 10 feet of it. If a giant catfish rolls a natural 20 on its
bite attack it swallows an opponent whole.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Old Sparky
Shouts for help shatter the still of the night. The screams lead PCs to
the riverbank of the Quell River, where a glowing circle of light cast by a
fisherman's lantern bobbles wildly as his small boat goes round and round
in wide circles. The fisherman – an old salt named Grumby – holds on
for dear life as the rowboat races through the water, pulled by something
holding the rusty chain anchor.
A giant electric catfish is hooked on the other end of the anchor. It
swallowed the spiked metal chain when Grumby tossed it overboard. The
fish is swimming wildly in the 20-foot-deep river trying to dislodge the
hook. Lightning flashes across the water as the angry fish sends jolts of
electricity up the chain. Grumby pleads for help.

Chameleon, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: bite (1d8+1)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: tongue grab, swallow whole
Move: 6/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Giant chameleons are either green or brown in color with the females
being slightly darker and heavier than the males. Males are distinguished
by the white lateral line running the length of their bodies and the dark
bands extending from head to tail. Females usually possess a dark yellow
lateral stripe. Both species have striped throats and lips. Giant chameleons
attack with their tongue. If the tongue hits, it wraps around the victim and
pulls it to the creature's mouth for automatic bite damage in the next
round. If the chameleon rolls a natural 20 for its bite attack, it swallows its
prey whole. Anything swallowed whole suffers 1d8+1 points of damage
plus 1d4 points of acid damage from the creature's digestive juices. Giant
chameleons can rotate their eyes independently in a 180-degree radius,
making it impossible to sneak up on them.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Meghan Greene.

Chameleon, Rock
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: bite (1d8+1)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: tongue grab, swallow whole
Move: 6/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Rock chameleons resemble common giant chameleons but their
natural coloration is gray and they are only found in warm and temperate
mountains where their coloration allows them to blend in with their
surroundings. Rock chameleons attack with their tongue. If the tongue
hits, it wraps around the victim and pulls it to the creature's mouth for
automatic bite damage in the next round. If the chameleon rolls a natural
20 for its bite attack, it swallows its prey whole. Anything swallowed
whole suffers 1d8+1 points of damage plus 1d4 points of acid damage
from the creature's digestive juices. Rock chameleons can rotate their
eyes independently in a 180-degree radius, making it impossible to sneak
up on them.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Meghan Greene.

Chameleon, Giant Horned
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: bite (1d8+1)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: tongue grab, swallow whole, gore
Move: 6/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Giant horned chameleons are green or dark green. Males are
distinguished by the three large horns protruding from their head. This
grants them a gore attack (1d6 damage) that they can use in lieu of a
bite or tongue attack. These chameleons have a crest on the back of their
head, and bony ridges and spines running the length of their back. Giant
horned chameleons can also attack with their tongue. If the tongue hits, it
wraps around the victim and pulls it to the creature's mouth for automatic
bite damage in the next round. If the chameleon rolls a natural 20 for
its bite attack, it swallows its prey whole. Anything swallowed whole
suffers 1d8+1 points of damage plus 1d4 points of acid damage from the
creature's digestive juices. Giant horned chameleons can rotate their eyes
independently in a 180-degree radius, making it impossible to sneak up
on them.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Meghan Greene.

Wildebeest Buffet
The stench of rotting meat flows down the corridors leading into this
rocky underground chamber. A dim ghostly light rises off the caps of
giant iridescent mushrooms, glowing beacons in the gloom. Ten-footwide stone ledges rise throughout the 50-foot-high room. The buzz of flies
is a discordant drone echoing from rock to rock. Lying in a furry tangle of
rot in the center of the chamber are the remains of four wildebeests that
descended into the cave and couldn’t escape. Feasting on the carcasses
are 4 giant flies, which largely ignore PCs unless they try to hone in on
the wildebeest buffet. The flies stay in the center of the room, avoiding
the walls. Lounging on three of the stone ledges, waiting to pick off any
stray flies or PCs, are 3 giant chameleons.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Meghan Greene.

Deer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack: 2 hooves (1d4) or gore (1d6)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Surprise on roll of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

deer as well, with a few minor changes. The black-tailed deer prefers
plains, hills, and other open ground as its habitat. In combat, a blacktailed deer jumps about in an effort to confuse its attackers before stotting
(hopping) away.

Salt Lick Fool

Shy and wary, deer range from the arctic to the tropics. They are very
flexible creatures, adapting easily to their climate and able to survive in
all but the harshest of temperatures. Deer are very flexible in their diets
as well, able to exist on plants, insects, fish, and even dead birds. Deer
are excellent swimmers and have been known to swim to a distance of
five miles in the water. These statistics represent the typical white-tailed
deer; they can also be used to represent other deer-like animals such as
caribou and antelope.
Deer attack with their hooves or antlers. Antelopes, when defending
their herd, attack by charging an opponent and butting with their horns
(gore). The gore attack only applies to bucks with antlers.

A few miles away from a farming village there is a salt lick in the form
of a cliff about 25 feet tall. The land slopes down gently from the salt lick
and supports a number of pine trees and blueberries.
Herds of mule deer visit the rock regularly, and thus encounters with
predators around the salt lick occur on a roll of 1-3 on 1d6. The villagers
generally avoid the area, though they do stalk the trails that lead to it.
The prime attraction for humans is a strange statue nicknamed “the
idiot”. The statue sits atop the cliff, and looks like a rotund man with
wild hair and a large smile on its face. It is said that one can climb to the
top of the salt lick and whisper their plans into the statue's ear. If the plan
is likely to fail, a small tear forms in the statue's eye and rolls down its
cheek.

Black-Tailed Deer

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The statistics above can be used to represent the average black-tailed

Dragonfish
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Poison spines, surprise on 1-4 on 1d6
Move: 9 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

While the walk is most often taken by visiting diplomats and noblemen
seeking redress for wrongs done by other noblemen (all 400 of the
kingdom's noblemen are either sons, cousins or nephews of the pasha,
who is married to 45 wives), it is also walked by those condemned to
die for such crimes as plundering tombs and other subterranean venues
without holding legal charter. The pool is home to a single dragonfish,
and should one manage to walk the length of the pool without stepping on
the beast, they will often find their wishes granted by the pasha.

This small flat fish has brown scales mottled with black. A series of
needle-like spines runs the length of the fish on its dorsal side.
A dragonfish is a small, 2-foot long, flat fish that makes its home on the
bottom of shallow lakes, rivers, or streams. They are non-aggressive and
spend their days eating miniscule water creatures, insects, and aquatic
plants. A dragonfish's back is covered with long, sharp spines. A creature
stepping on a dragonfish or attacking it unarmed or with natural weapons
must succeed on a saving throw or have a spine snap off in his or her
flesh. Lodged spines impose a -1 penalty on attacks and saving throws per
spine and inject the victim with poison, inflicting 1d6 points of damage.
A spine can be removed safely by a barber, healer or surgeon; otherwise,
removing a spine deals an extra 1d4 points of damage.

Credit: The Dragonfish originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Albie
Fiore.

Tread Carefully
It is an age old tradition that those who would petition the pasha must
first walk the 500 steps to his throne through the black pool. “Black pool”
in this case is not just a clever name, but an accurate description, for the
2-foot deep pool, lined in azure tiles, is ensorcelled with an impenetrable
darkness. Though filled with water, at might just as well be filled with
shadow. The pool is about five feet wide, and runs down the center of the
pasha's throne room, itself clad in tiles of white marble and no fewer than
500 columns of porphyry with brass capitals depicting in miniature the
3,000 year history of the pasha's kingdom, starting with its foundation by
a man raised by giant cockroaches on the banks of a dismal swamp and
including its recent foray into a campaign of genocide against the orcs of
the western hills.

Eel, Electric
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Electricity, immunity to electricity
Move: 0/15 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Electric eels resemble snakes ranging from 9 to 20 feet long and
weighing 50 to 120 pounds. Its body is grayish-brown and lightens near
the head. Small yellow splotches can be seen near the mouth. The electric
eel is slimy to the touch and has no scales (the electric eel is not a true
eel, but a fish).
An electric eel prefers to discharge its electricity when it first enters
combat. Those slain or rendered unconscious by the shock are devoured.
Should any opponents survive the attack, the eel either flees (if
outnumbered) or attacks its remaining foes with its bite.
Once per hour, an electric eel can produce a jolt of electricity (about
800 volts at 1 ampere current) in a 10-foot radius centered on its body.
Creatures within 5 feet take 3d8 points of electricity damage. Those
further away than 5 feet but within 10 feet take 2d8 points of electricity
damage. Affected creatures can make a saving throw to reduce the
damage by half. Electric eels are immune to their own electrical attacks
and that of other electric eels.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Eel Count
On the banks of a river that cuts through a rain forest, an unsuspecting
band of adventurers might have the misfortune of running into a gang of
trained red howler monkeys (see below). The monkeys have been trained
by a man who calls himself the River Count to steal from the travelers and
caravans that travel along the banks of the river.
The River Count dwells in a ramshackle castle that stands on a small,
rocky island in the middle of the wide river. The banks of the island are
clogged with dwarf banana plants and the castle is alive with the sights
and sounds of monkeys. The count “owns” about 20 of the red devils,
treating them as his court and stashing away their ill-gotten goods in a
locked, bronze chest hidden in the half-submerged cellar of the castle.
The cellar consists of two small rooms connected by a short tunnel with
a low, arched ceiling. The entry chamber is filled with water up to about
2 feet. Shelves above the water hold molding foodstuffs and a few bottles
of fine, sweet wine.
The bronze chest is kept in the second chamber, which is lower than
the first and filled up to chest height with river water. One wall of the
cellar has partially collapsed, letting in the river water and a pair of large
electric eels (maximum hp). The chest is kept in a high alcove and
is retrieved by gangs of monkeys.

Eel, Giant Moray
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  Bite (1d8 plus disease) and tail lash (1d4)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Disease, immune to disease and fear, surprise on
roll of 1-3 on 1d6
Move: 3/9 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Giant moray eels are greatly feared predators found in warm oceans and
seas. They sustain themselves on a diet of crustaceans, fish, and unlucky
swimmers who happen to swim too close to their lair. Giant moray eels
make their lairs in underwater caves or hollows, a typical lair consisting
of two adults and up to 6 young. The bite of the giant moray carries a
disease that rots the flesh. The rotting sets in one minute after the bite is
delivered and a saving throw is failed, robbing the victim of 1d6 points
of constitution and 1d6 points of charisma each day unless a daily saving
throw is passed. The disease persists until a saving throw is passed by 5
or more points, a cure disease spell is received or the victim's constitution
is reduced to 0, at which point they die. Charisma cannot be reduced to
below 1. When (or if) the disease is cured or overcome, constitution and
charisma return at the rate of 1 point per day, though scarring from the
disease permanently destroys one point of each score. Giant moray eels
can survive out of the water for 12 rounds, after which they begin to
drown.

Credit: The Giant Moray Eel originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Heart of Stone
On the banks of a tropical estuary a small tribe of hobgoblins, no
more than 20 males and 30 to 40 females and children, works a network
of salt pannes and pools, drying the salt into cubes and wrapping it in
banana leaves for shipment to the larger tribes in the volcanic mountains
located many miles inland.
While the hobgoblins do a bit of spear fishing, they never stray far
into the estuary for fear of the school of 2d4 giant moray eels that dwell
therein. The hobgoblins worship a granite idol, weathered and almost
devoid of features, standing on a sandbar in the middle of the estuary the distant god, they call him.
The hobgoblins make sacrifices to their god by directing strangers into
the estuary or simply not warning them away. Any goods or survivors
who come ashore are considered a blessing by the granite god and
belong the hobgoblin's shaman (a large, warty male who cast spells as a
4th level cleric).

Eel, Gulper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Swallow whole
Move: 9 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

A gulper eel averages 10 feet in length but can grow to reach 30 feet
or more. Its body is long, sleek, and black in color and its tail ends in a
luminous organ. Its eyes are small for its body and close to its snout. It
massive mouth is lined with rows of sharpened teeth. A gulper eel can
unhinge its jaw and stretch its stomach to swallow opponents whole on a
roll of 15 or greater on a bite attack.

From the Depths
A wide lake spreads out from the base of a slender stone tower rising
into the sky. Lily pads drift lazily atop the azure water, blown about by
a gentle breeze. Frogs croak a discordant tune along the edges of the
nearly quarter-mile-wide lake. Bobbing lights flit beneath the surface like
underwater fireflies.

The magic-user Isen Frong stocks his private lake with truly unique
monstrosities. The lake is enchanted to duplicate pressures found nearly
3,000 feet underwater, to better accommodate deep-sea monsters rarely
seen by those on land.

In the lake are a menagerie of humpback anglerfish, giant squid and
Frong's prize possession: two gulper eels he personally traveled nearly
8,000 feet into the ocean depths to retrieve. The gulper eels are vicious
monsters that leap from the water to snatch at creatures too near the shore.
Anyone falling or jumping into the water feels the crushing weight of the
deep ocean pressing in on them, like being hit by a mace on all sides at
once, and suffers 2d6 points of damage per round while in the water.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Falcon, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 2 talons (1d6+1), 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Rend (2d6)
Move: 3/30 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

A typical giant falcon stands 9 feet tall and has a wingspan of up to 18
feet. Feather coloration varies, but typically ranges from brownish-red
to brown. Its eyes are brown and its wings are tapered. The giant falcon
has a short, slim tail consisting of brown, white, and black feathers. Most
giant falcons have a light-colored chest with white predominant on the
neck and throat and slowly fading as it reaches the abdomen. A giant
falcon attacks by swooping down on its foe and raking with its talons and
stabbing with its beak. If a giant falcon hits with both claws on a single
opponent, it latches on and tears at the victim's flesh for 2d6 points of
damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The River Wild
The Peregrin River is a deep, slow-moving waterway winding through
the Granite Dive Cliffs. Tall cattails sway on the shallow banks leading to
the brilliant blue waters, and salmon leap and splash. Tall pines overhang
the water.
Stretching across the water is a thick hemp rope tied to one of the bigger
pines. The rope sags across the 600-foot expanse of open water. A small
ten-foot-wide square raft made of weathered logs sits in the water near
the bank, with two ropes tied to its edges. The end of one is anchored to
a nearby tree stump with a coil of rope lying on the ground. The second
rope is tied to a tree stump on the other bank, the hemp strand floating on
the surface of the river.
The raft is designed so one or two people at most can stand on it and
pull themselves across the channel. The ropes attached to the raft allow it
to be retrieved by others wanting to cross. Crossing is easy, as the river is
slow-moving although it is nearly 60 feet deep at its center. The only real
threat is a giant falcon that terrorizes travelers trying to cross. The bird of
prey makes its aerie on one of the granite cliffs. It swoops down on PCs
once they are halfway across the lake. It tries to pluck them off the raft
and return to its mountain nest.

Fox
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack: Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Surprise on roll of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Foxes are opportunistic eaters with a diet that consists of mice and
voles, rabbits, birds, eggs, amphibians and small reptiles, fish, mollusks,
earthworms, carrion, and plants. Foxes are also known to scour garbage
and refuse in settled areas. The statistics above describe the common red
fox, but can be used for other foxes such as the grey fox or arctic fox.
The fox is a very territorial creature and spends about one-third of its
day hunting for food (most hunting is performed at night). Foxes are
excellent hunters and have even been known to bring down prey much
larger than themselves. When prey is encountered, the fox leaps at it and
dispatches it with a series of quick bites.
Arctic foxes surprise on a roll of 1-3 on 1d6 in snowy surroundings.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Fox Hunt
A party of 1d6+4 nobles in mail shirts and pointed helms is running
down a fox. The nobles are being led by a huntsman, a wiry, olive-skinned
man with strawberry blond hair and a cruel glint in his eye.
The nobles have been at it for some time. The woodlands they are
coursing through belong to oldest of the noblemen, a terrifying man with
a scarred face and raven hair that is turning white at the temples. His
son looks like a younger, chubbier verson of him, with a kindly face and
afable demeanor.
The son has paid a gang of 1d6+6 bandits to kill his father. The bandits
are hiding in the woods and expect the son to lead his father into their
ambush. It will only be too unfortunate if a band of adventurers were to
stumble into the middle of the hunt or ambush.

Frog, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack: Tongue (grapple), bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Leap, swallow whole
Move: 9/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

This creature is a larger version of a frog. It has razor-sharp teeth
lining its mouth.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Frog, Killer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (1d6), 2 claws (1d3)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Rake with claws
Move: 6/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Killer frogs are similar to their dire cousins, except that they stand
partially erect and use their front claws as well as their bite. Killer frogs
are created by an evil mutation of dire frogs through a practice thought to
be known only to the worshipers of Tsathogga. Killer frogs, being more
humanoid in appearance, do not have adhesive tongues.

Credit: The Killer Frog originally appeared in the First Edition Monster
Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Frog, Giant Dire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack: Tongue (grapple), bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Leap, swallow whole
Move: 12/15 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

This frog appears to be at least 10 feet long. It resembles a feral
amphibian with dark mottled skin and black splotches on its body.

Credit: The Giant Dire Frog made its d20 debut in the Necromancer Games module
D1 Tomb of Abysthor.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

Frog, Poisonous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack: Bite (1d2 plus poison)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Poison
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

This small, greenish-brown frog with black striped legs is very poisonous
and anyone contacting them risks being poisoned. Poisonous frogs
secrete poison from their mouth and skin. A creature hit by or touching
a poisonous frog must succeed on a saving throw or take 2d6 points of
strength damage. Lost strength returns at the rate of 1 point per hour. A
creature whose strength is reduced to 0 is paralyzed for 24 hours before
lost strength begins to return.

Copyright Notice: Authors Scott Greene and Clark Peterson, based on original
material by Gary Gygax.

When Frogs Attack
You find yourself in a large, bowl-shaped cavern lit by floating witchlights.
The cavern is about 60 feet in diameter and the ceiling is 40 feet overhead.
The walls of the cavern are terraced and home to an astouding array of frogs.
Their cacophony can be heard for miles underground, but as soon as people
enter the cavern it ceases. The floor of the cavern is filled with
a brownish-green ooze. A pedestal of rusting iron rises from the center of the
ooze. Atop the pedestal there is an iron sculpture of a large frog, its eyes
gleaming like rubies and its open mouth filled with a phosphorescent liquid.
The terraces of the slime cavern are occupied by 3d6 poisonous giant frogs,
a couple giant frogs, a single giant dire frog and 3d6 giant killer frogs. The
frogs will not attack the adventurers merely watch them in complete silence.

If one enters the slime, they find it initially ankle high and growing to knee
high a few yards from the “shore”. More importantly, as one enters the slime
they will notice that the walls seem to grow farther apart with each step
they take toward the pedestal. Likewise, a yard of movement toward the pedestal
seems to bring it no more than an inch closer.

When one finally reaches the iron pedestal, they will find the walls about
1,000 feet away and the pedestal now occupied by an abyssal dire frog sitting
on an iron throne. If destroyed, the demonic frog will melt into a black slime
and leave behind a ruby decanter filled with a glowing liquid that confers
upon a person immunity to all energies, diseases and poisons for 24 hours.
Upon reaching the shore of the slime lake, space will again bend back to
normal, though the iron frog sculpture will not be there and the frogs on the
terraces will be locked in combat with one another, the destruction of their
liege apparently unleashing chaos in the cavern.

Hamster, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack: Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Cheek pouch, grab, immunity to disease
Move: 9/6 (burrowing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

Giant hamsters are larger, more aggressive relatives of the normal
hamster. Like their smaller cousins, they come in a variety of colors,
shapes, and sizes. Giant hamsters are omnivorous, but prefer to feast on
a diet of grains, berries, nuts, and water. On occasion, they indulge in
and eat meat, usually insects and the like. Also like its smaller cousin,
the giant hamster can store food in its cheek pouches. The average giant
hamster can store about 200 pounds of food at any given time.

Giant hamsters normally shun combat, but if cornered or extremely
hungry they may attack. Note that even domesticated giant hamsters
attack if their young are threatened. The giant hamster attacks by biting
with its long, sharp teeth.

A giant hamster can try to stuff a grabbed opponent of dwarf size or
smaller into its cheek pouch by making a successful bite attack. The
victim gets a saving throw to avoid being grabbed. A creature stuffed
into the giant hamster's cheek pouch takes no damage, and can escape by
making a successful open doors check or can cut its way out by using a
light slashing or piercing weapon to deal 10 points of damage to the cheek
(AC 8 [11]). A giant hamster's cheek can hold 1 dwarf or halfling.

Credit: The Giant Hamster originally appeared in the Second Edition Monstrous
Compendium (MC 7) (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1990) and is used by
permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Wizards
of the Coast.

Of Hamsters and Witches
In a land of dry, rocky hills, a cabal of witches tends a vast orchard of
pistachios. The eldest of the witches has long, silky hair and warm, hazel
eyes. She and her sisters worship the star goddess and maintain a small
shrine in her honor, complete with a small silver idol (50 gp).
The orchard is beset by ankheg, which mostly dwell in the lowlands
but make forays into the orchard to nibble on the bark of the pistachios,
which ruins the trees. The sisters use their magic to protect the sacred
trees, but also employ a pack of 1d4+2 giant golden hamsters, which prey
on giant insects.
The giant hamsters prowl the orchard at night, and are as apt to attack
humanoid intruders as they are to go after ankhegs. One of the witches
(there are seven in all, the leader being a 5th level magic-user, the others
ranging in level from 1st to 3rd) keeps vigil each night and will rouse the
others if there is an attak.

Hippopotamus
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Capsize, trample, hold breath
Move: 12/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

The hippo is a peaceful creature, but will defend its lair and young if
provoked. They are found dwelling near rivers and lakes. Hippos in the
water move by running along the bottom of lakes and rivers, surfacing
occasionally to gulp air. A hippo can trample opponents by moving
over them, inflicting 1d8 points of damage on each person who fails a
saving throw. Those who succeed leap aside and suffer only 1d4 points
of damage.

A submerged hippo that surfaces under a boat or ship less than 10 feet
long capsizes the vessel 95% of the time. It has a 50% chance to capsize
a vessel from 10-20 feet long. Huge hippos have a 20% chance to capsize
a vessel over 30 feet long. Large hippos cannot capsize vessels over 20
feet long.

A hippo can hold its breath for an hour and a half before it risks
drowning.

Temple of the River Horses
A bloat of 2d6 hippopotamuses luxuriates in the waters around a
sandstone temple dedicated to the local river goddess. The temple is an
ornate affair, decorated with blue tiles and onyx capitals on the supporting
pillars. The temple consists of a central sanctum and a dozen side
chambers used as living quarters and storage by the river priestesses. The
sanctum holds a tall idol of sandstone and terracotta, glazed to appear as a
luminous woman with blue hair and eyes and ochre colored skin.

The aforementioned idol is a mere illusion. The illusion hides a 10-foot
wide hole in the floor of the sanctum. This hole leads to a half-submerged
tunnel that connectes with the river. Despite the illusion, one can hear
the water lapping at the sides of the tunnel, and sometimes hear a hippo
inside, for they are used to traveling up the tunnel when they hear a bell
rung to get treats from the high priestess.

The priestesses have a somewhat menacing look in their eyes today.
They are wrapped in brown robes and have curved, poisoned daggers
in sheaths hidden beneath their robes. The “priestesses” are actually
assassins, hired by a rival wind temple to destroy the river priestesses.
The remains of the six real priestesses are hidden in one of the storage
chambers behind barrels of rose water.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Hyaenodon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: None
Move: 18
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Hyaenodons have large, upward pointing ears and dark spots along
their bodies. As they age, these spots grow darker. They range in size
from 5 to 8 feet long and weigh anywhere from 300 to 330 pounds. The
largest hyaenodons reach lengths of 14 feet and weigh up to 600 pounds.
Hyaenodons have massive jaws and large bone crushing teeth. They walk
on their toes, and their claws are blunt and non-retractile.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Death on the Plains
A wildebeest lies in a clearing in the Burning Grasslands, the corpse
ringed by a patch of dried blood splashed over the low scrub. The beast's
stomach is ripped open, and its bowels lie in long strands across the grassy
plain. The stench is overpowering. A small herd of exhausted wildebeests
stands slightly away from the dead one. The living wildebeests are tired
and thirsty, and have been hounded for days by a pack of 5 hyaenodons.
The hyaenodons are accompanied by 12 normal hyenas. The bigger
hyaenadons slink in the low scrub to get close to prey, then bite and
disembowel opponents. The wildebeest herd is too tired to run at the sight
of the creatures. The hyaenadons only take down a wildebeest to consume
whenever they hunger – but they surround PCs they encounter, looking
for fresh meat.

Jaguar
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3+2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 24/12/12 (climb/swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

Jaguars are sometimes confused with leopards. Both cats have a brownish-yellow base fur
with dark spots or markings. The jaguar can be distinguished by the smaller markings inside
the spots. A jaguar's forelimbs and head are slightly larger than the average leopard (another
distinguishing characteristic). Black jaguars are often called black panthers (a misnomer applied
to black leopards sometimes as well).

Death From Above
Twisted banyan trees form a wooden maze of trunks through the dense jungle. Bonobo
monkeys bounce from limb to limb, chattering angrily and raining feces and rotten fruit down
on PCs who venture too close. The monkeys shriek and scream at intruders, bouncing frantically
on the limbs, before grabbing the thick vines and swinging away from danger.
As bad as the monkeys are, they aren’t the true danger in the jungle. A jaguar slinks along the
higher limbs, stealthily hunting the monkeys – and anyone else who gets in its way. The great cat
pounces from above, a brown and yellow blur that leaps from the treetops with its sharp claws
leading the way. The cat is an opportunistic hunter and retreats into the jungle to strike again at
its prey when least expected.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Leopard, Snow
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3+2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3), bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 18/12 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

carcass back to its hole to consume at its leisure. Inside the den is the
remains of its most recent meal, a thief caught out in the bitter storm. A
+1 dagger is still strapped to his body.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

A snow leopard is about 5 feet long with light gray or smoke gray
fur that turns white on its underbelly. Its fur is covered with large rings
that contain smaller and darker spots of dark gray or black. Its fur is
over 1-inch thick and provides it with warmth against the harshest of
temperatures. Eyes are gray or dark blue. Its paws are large and thickfurred which enables it to maintain its footing on the most treacherous of
snow-covered ground.

Night Hunter
Drifting piles of snow roll through the winter darkness, pushed by
a screaming banshee-like wind that blows across the frozen tundra.
The temperature is frigid, with metal sticking to unprotected skin, and
movements slowed by the waist-high snow and ice.
Lurking in the darkness, unhindered by the deep snow, a snow leopard
waits for lone creatures to leave the safety of their camps before it attacks
in a bounding leap that carries it through the driving snow in a killing
force of sinewy muscle and sleek fur.
The big cat has a small lair in a nearby rock wall where it retreats during
the worst of the storms. It kills its prey on the open ice and drags the

Lion, Cave
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7+2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 9
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

Cave lions grow to a length of 14 feet and weigh in excess of 900 pounds, though the typical
cave lion is about 10 feet long and weighs about 600 pounds. They have a broad face and rounded
ears, and unlike common lions, neither males nor females possess a mane. They range in color
from dark yellowish-brown to gold. Many have a mottled coat with darker spots of brown or gray.
Their underbellies are lighter in color, even white on some species. Eyes vary from green to gold
to brown. Their mouths are lined with rows of sharp teeth and oversized canines measuring about
5 inches in length.

The Lion Tamers
The Barnabas Circus has lost its lion. The great old cat that was the star of the show died
three days ago during a center-ring performance. Overfeeding and a lack of exercise did the
beast in. Now, Kyrin Barnabas desperately needs another lion, and he's willing to pay anyone
who’ll capture another big cat for him. He's even tracked down where a perfect specimen is
hiding; he just needs someone to go and get the beast.
The cat Barnabas discovered is a monster that lives in a rocky mountain cave above the
village of Thornwild. He’ll pay 1,500 gp to a group that traps the cat, and may go up to 2,000
gp if they do so without injuring the beast too badly. The big cat's cave is in a barren stretch of
rocky crags, with granite rock ledges and fallen oak trees surrounding it. A half-eaten zebra lies
outside the dark cave, and bloody tracks lead into the dark recess. The pawprints are large and
pressed deep into the dirt. What Barnabas doesn’t know is that the cat is actually a cave lion,
and the feral monster doesn’t take kindly to people poking around its lair.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Lion, Mountain
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3+2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4), 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 18/12 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

The parents hunt the hillsides for rabbits and deer, but won’t hesitate
to attack anyone coming too near their cubs. The female is particularly
cunning, launching herself from tree branches to hit and roll intruders.
The male goes more for speed, driving himself from hiding to claw and
bite before darting into the underbrush.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Mountain lions stand about 2 feet tall and are about 4 to 5 feet long with
a 2 to 3 foot long tail. A typical mountain lion weighs around 125 pounds.
It has short, coarse, fur with a white underbelly and a black-tipped tail. Its
fur color (except its underbelly) is typically brown, black, rust, or gray.
Its eyes are golden.

Claws of the Wild
The forested paths winds through tall strands of pines and aspens. The
landscape is broken by huge boulders fallen from the mountainside, and
thick green moss covers the fallen stones.
A pair of mountain lions makes their lair in a hollow beneath two fallen
boulders. The den is accessed via a narrow hole between the rocks that
opens into a 10-foot-wide hollow. Three cubs prowl the den's interior,
rolling over one another in thick bundles of fur and claw.

Lizard, Giant Rock-Horned
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attack: Bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Spit blood, surprise on roll of 1-2 on 1d6
Move: 12/9 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

The rock-horned lizard is commonly referred to as the blood lizard
because of its ability to shoot a stream of blood from its eyes when
threatened. The rock-horned lizard grows to a length of 8 feet. Its head
is wedge-shaped, and small horns protrude from the sides and top of its
head. Its scales are dark reddish-brown or gold in color.
Once per hour, a rock-horned lizard can fire a stream of caustic blood
from its eyes in a 20-foot line that deals 2d8 points of acid damage to a
single target within range (saving throw for half damage).

Blood in My Eye
In a red desert with tall saguaros and barrel cactus and a variety of
wildlife, there dwells a solitary giant rock-horned lizard. The lizard dwells
in an abandoned mine dug into a slop that overlooks the sea. The mine
was dug into the golden sandstone and runs about 30 feet back before
ending in a cave-in. There doesn’t appear to be any useful or precious
material in the mine, making its reason for existance a mystery.
The giant rock-horned lizard dwells near the mouth of the cave, for the
back parts of the cave give it the creeps. Should one travel to the back
of the cave, they must pass a saving throw each turn or become drowsy
and fall into a deep sleep. While sleeping, the astral form is carried away
beyond the world one knows and to a place quite different and startling.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Lynx
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3), bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 18/12 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

One carries a dagger. The leader is a man named Collins, a big burly
hunter whose thick layers of fat provide more than enough protection on
its own from the cold.
A pack of wolves has been sneaking into town and preying on the
village's pack animals and sled dog pups. Tracks can be found throughout
the village every morning. Collins has had enough. He's gathered these
amateur hunters to track down and find the wolves. He's convinced the
men that the wolves are more scared of them and won’t be a match for
their skills.
Unfortunately, Collins misread the tracks, which do indeed appear to
be wolf prints. Instead, the men are facing a pride of 12 lynxes. The wild
felines are hungry and feral, and attack from high and low, leaping from
the rocks and trees to rake opponents with their claws. The lynxes have a
small underground den in the middle of the snowy forest where they are
raising a litter of six kittens.

A lynx has thick, gray fur that is spotted, striped, or plain. During the
winter months through the summer months, its coat varies from spotted to
plain. Its short tail is ringed and tipped with black fur. Its pointed ears are
tipped with tufts of long black hairs and its eyes range from green to gray
to brown. Its paws are large and covered with thick fur. This helps the
lynx distribute its weight when moving across snowy terrain. The average
lynx is 2 1/2 feet to 4 feet long and weighs 20-40 pounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Caracal
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d3), bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 24/12 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

The caracal is a small cat, very similar to the lynx, and is commonly
referred to as the desert lynx (even though it doesn’t live in desert
regions). The caracal is found in warm or temperate plains and hills.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Wolf Hunt
The snow drifts are high around the small village of Sil-Walden, the
weather hovering just above freezing. The villagers walk about in thick
layers of wolf-hide to keep the cold at bay.
Five men stand in the center of town, each armed with whatever
weapons they could find. Some have bows, while some wave thick clubs.

Mammoth
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 trunk slam (1d10), 2 gore (1d10+4), 2 trample
(2d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 12/2,000

The mammoth is a relative of the elephant and the mastodon though
its head is slightly taller than an elephant's and slightly wider than
a mastodon's. Its upward curving tusks are longer than those of the
mastodon, and its trunk ends in two, small finger-like projections used
for grasping branches, fruits, and other such small items. The mammoth
stands about 22 feet tall and is covered in a thick coat of gray, brown,
reddish-brown, yellowish-brown, or black fur with a coarse “under-fur”
beneath it to protect it in harsh climates.

In This Ring . . . Revenge
Barnabus Freep's Traveling Circus is in town, boys and girls,
so get your parents and bring your gold, for the time of your
lives! The nomadic circus performers have pitched their multihued tent on the outskirts of Fairhaven this fine day, and signs
throughout town promise wonders and delights for all ages.
But a disgruntled dwarf clown known only as Quip is tired
of the constant abuse he takes in every town the circus
visits. He's decided to have his revenge for the years of
insults, and Fairhaven is about to know dwarven clown
wrath in the form of a herd of stampeding mammoths.
During the center ring spectacle as 6 mammoths
perform various tricks, Quip gleefully lets loose a dozen
white mice, then stands back laughing as the circus
comes crashing down. The mammoths charge the crowd,
looking to escape.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Mandrill
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 9/9 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

This brightly-colored primate has a bushy mane, dense fur, and a long
ridged snout. The average adult mandrill reaches a height of just under
3 feet tall and weighs around 35 pounds (though some males generally
weigh around 50 pounds). A mandrill's fur is olive brown fading to a paler
color on its underbelly. Adult males have a bright blue and red snout and
a yellowish “beard.” Females and young mandrills are likewise colored,
but their colorations are duller.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Guerilla Warfare
The warrior-cultist Amad Thorct's life took an unexpected turn when he
died. A roc falling from the sky smashed the evil man's life and halted his
grand schemes of conquest before they even got started. His companions
grudgingly brought him back to life, but the resurrection didn’t go as
planned. Instead of returning to his youthful, brawny body, Amad found
himself in the form of a 5-foot-tall mandrill. He fled into the jungle to
hide his shame.
Amad has adjusted to his new life in the trees, and now leads a colony of
mandrills as the alpha male. Amad still dreams of conquest and organized
the 20 mandrills into a scavenging force that attacks travelers near the
Seething Jungle. He leads the colony to scatter pack animals and raid
caravans. The monkeys carry crude spears and fight as a ragtag guerilla
force.

Margay
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d2) and 1 bite (1d4+1)
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Rake
Move: 9/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Margays are jungle-dwelling cats similar to the ocelot.
A margay is a small, slender, spotted cat with fur that
ranges in color from tan to brown or cinnamon. Its
spots are darker and run in longitudinal rows along its
body. Margays generally average about 2 feet long
and weigh about 8 pounds. If a margay hits a single
opponent with its 2 claws, it rakes the victim with its
back claws for an additional 1d4 points of damage.

Cat and Canary
A green-and-yellow parrot flutters down out of the trees and alights on a
PCs shoulder. The bird can’t be shooed away, and tells PCs that its master
Lornil Zamph needs help and will pay handsomely if they come quickly.
The magic-user is stuck in a portal to the netherworld, and needs someone
to pull him out while dispelling the portal.
The PCs may not get a chance to find out more than this, however, as
a margay is stalking the parrot. It leaps out of the woods to snatch at the
colorful parrot. If allowed, it swipes the bird to the ground, pounces on it,
and snatches it up in its mouth. It dashes back into the woods to feast on
its catch. The parrot screams for help the entire time.

Marmoset, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack: 2 claws (1d6), bite (1d8) or 2 claws (1d6), tail (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Only surprised on roll of 1 on 1d8
Move: 15/12 (climbing)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

stand of towering junipers crawling with no fewer than two dozen giant
marmosets. In the midst of this stand of trees there is a small landing
built of pure, white marble with broad steps into a shallow pool of water apparently a hot spring judging by the steam that hangs over it.
The pool of water is the legendary Fountain of Youth. Bathing in the
fountain acts as a potion of longevity (one dose per ten minutes spent in
the bath), but bathers are always harried by the screaming marmosets
before they can do so. The marmosets are quite aggressive until two or
three have been killed, at which point they retire into the woods, content
to harass adventurers as they leave the clearing.
There is a 1 in 12 chance that when one reaches the pool they find
a hearty and hale man bathing there. The man has old, wise eyes and
a noble bearing. His clothes, laying on the landing, are all velvet and
silk and include a tall, pointed cap of blue velvet covered with stars and
moons in silver thread. The man is a duke and a very powerful magicuser (9th level at least). He lives on the island in a cave complex he has
turned into a palace with his command over the spirits of the island. He is
always accompanied by his brutish guard, a 5th level fighting-man with
half-orc blood.

Giant marmosets are larger, more aggressive relatives of the smaller
marmoset. Their fur is gray or black, with black fur predominant over
the back and neck. Their tails reach a length of 5 feet and are colored in
alternating bands of black and pale gray. They sustain themselves on a
diet of tree saps and gums (using their sharp teeth to gnaw holes in the
bark), small animals, and various fruits and nuts. Giant marmosets make
their homes among the trees, rarely touching the ground unless hunting
living prey. They are, on occasion, tamed by wild tribes of halflings and
used as mounts in times of war.
Giant marmosets prefer to attack from surprise, tossing large stones from
the sides of cliffs at their prey, hanging from branches by their tail and
swinging down to surprise their prey, or dropping from the trees on their
unaware foes. They attack using their claws and bite or claws and a tail slap.

Credit: The Giant Marmoset originally appeared in the Basic Edition module B3
Palace of the Silver Princess (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used
by permission.

Fountain of Tempest
A tropical island of lush, green hills and dense rain forest plays host to
a number of giant marmosets. The marmosets grow thicker in number
as one moves deeper into the rain forest, until finally they come to a

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Jean
Wells.

Mastodon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: 1 trunk slam (2d6), 2 gore (1d12+2), 2 trample (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 15/2,900

The mastodon is a distant relative to the elephant though it is slightly
longer and lower to the ground, with shorter and thicker legs than the
common elephant. Its head is slightly longer and taller than an elephant's
and the mastodon's entire body is covered in thick fur of brown, gray,
reddish-brown, yellowish-brown, or black. Its long, upward curving tusks
are formed of ivory and are white or yellowish-white in color. Its eyes
range from gray to brown to green. An average mastodon stands 20 feet
tall.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Ichor Pit
Tall grains sway in a field of wildflowers, the gold wheat dancing in
the light breezes playing over the rolling hills. Stunted trees – their bark
rubbed away to reveal naked wood – stand in sad clumps along the hill.
A loud trumpeting echoes through the valley, a horrible sound of distress.
PCs who follow the sound find a large tar pit stretching between a series
of cliff faces. The black tar bubbles and spits, and a noxious steam rises
off in a miasmic cloud.
Struggling within the tar trap are six mastodons. The decayed bodies
of other mastodons, a cave lion and other herd animals stick out of the
ichor. The lead mastodons in the herd blundered into the tar. Two young
bull elephants remain free and trumpet angrily as they walk the edges of
the morass. One is coated in tar after barely escaping the muck. The pair
are scared and angry, and the frantic bellows of the females is driving
them crazy.
The mastodons charge PCs who advance on the trapped elephants. The
bull elephants try to grab creatures and toss them into the tar.

Moose
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: Butt (1d8) or 2 hooves (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: None
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Moose are the largest members of the elk family, ranging in size from 4
1/2 feet to over 8 feet tall at the shoulder and weighing from 440 to over
1,000 pounds. Males have broad, flat antlers that can reach a length of 5
feet or more. These antlers are shed each year after mating season. The
moose's fur ranges from brown to black, changing to a dull gray in the
winter months. They are excellent swimmers, often swimming into deep
water to feed on aquatic plants.
Generally non-aggressive if left alone, moose can become quite
aggressive if approached. They have poor eyesight, but excellent hearing,
and tend to flee rather than fight as soon as would-be attackers are
detected. If forced into combat, a moose attacks with its antlers or hooves

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Just Don’t Eat the Pie
In a boggy lowland of hawthorns, a dangerous bull moose has managed
to tree a halfling princess. The princess and her handmaidens were
bathing in a warm spring near a hook-shaped, buff-colored rock when
the moose came upon them. The halflings scattered and the princess was
unlucky enough to be chased. She just managed to make her way up the
tree before the moose trampled her.
One of the handmaidens is heading towards her village to fetch a band
of bravos. The village is set into a wooded hill and consists of a number
of burrows braced by moose antlers and bones. The warriors of the tribe
wear shirts of leather scales and carry shortbows and hand axes.
The other handmaiden headed for an old cleft in a nearby range of granite
hills, seeking an ancient stone golem placed there many generations ago
by a friendly human shaman. The stone golem exists under orders to
protect the wee folk, and with some urging will scoop up the maiden and
head for a confrontation with the aggressive moose.

Oliphant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack:  2 stomps (2d8), gore (2d10)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: None
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

The oliphants are the first line of defense for the temple hidden in the
central mountain. The temple is actually the remnants of a volcanic cone
that collapsed in on itself. The inner surface of this cone is covered by
reddish-brown crystals, some growing as long as two feet. In the center
of this crystal cavern there is statue of unbreakable metal that looks like
gold. The statue looks like a solar encased in ruby red plate armor with
only its outstretched wings and golden eyes visible underneath the armor.
The statue and temple are tended by a flock of 1d6+3 giant owls, celestial
blue in color with intelligent, golden eyes. The statue they protect is an
actual solar that has been frozen in time. The solar, Izbeniel by name,
awaits the arrival of a pure human heart to awaken it from its slumber
and set it on a quest to purify the petty kingdoms surrounding the plains.

The oliphant is a 20-foot long creature resembling a mastodon. It is
omnivorous and rarely makes its home near civilized or settled areas.
Each of the creature's tusks brings 400 gp on the market. The oliphant's
fur is thick, brown, and aids in protecting it from cooler climates and
precipitation. Oliphants are sometimes trained as mounts or beasts of
burden by various humanoid races. Oliphants seem to understand the
common tongue, but they do not speak it.

Credit: The Oliphant originally appeared in the First Edition module EX2 Land
Beyond the Magic Mirror (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and later in the
First Edition Monster Manual II (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used
by permission.

Training an Oliphant

An oliphant requires training before it can bear a rider in combat. To
be trained, an oliphant must have a friendly attitude toward the trainer.
Training a friendly oliphant requires six weeks of work and an animal
trainer. Riding an oliphant does not require an exotic saddle. Oliphant
young are worth 2,000 gp each. Professional trainers charge 1,000 gp to
rear or train n oliphant.
Carrying Capacity: A light load for an oliphant is up to 2,400 pounds;
a medium load, 2,401-4,800 pounds; and a heavy load, 4,801-7,200
pounds. An oliphant can drag 36,000 pounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Crystal Cone Angel
The northern portion of a vast kingdom is noted for three lofty peaks
that rise from an otherwise flat plain. The peaks are called the Tricruxia's
Trident, after an obscure goddess once worshipped in the region. The
lands around the mountains are inhabited by a number of oliphant
families, each consisting of 2d4 animals (with a 25% chance that a calf
is present).

Pike, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: None
Move: 18 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 3/60

The giant pike averages about 9 feet long and can grow to a length of
20 feet. Its coloration varies from dark green to brown and its body is
covered in lighter colored spots. It has a single dorsal fin and a white or
cream-colored underbelly.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Flash of Scales
The Sin Mire Swamp is marked by varying depths of murky water,
thick stands of trees, and the deep sounds of bullfrogs hidden in the reeds.
PCs moving through the marsh must do so on a boat or by magic or risk
getting sucked into the sticky muck for good.
A pair of giant pike hunts in the five-foot-deep water of the watery
grassland. The large fish investigate disturbances caused by poles or oars
slapping the water and savagely attack shiny or metallic objects. The fish
leap from the water to attack reflective armor or flashing swords.

Quipper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1/4
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Attack: Bite (1d2)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Frenzy
Move: 0/12 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

The lake is populated by a school of 1d2 x 50 quipper, and the dwarves
are quite aware of their presence in the lake, having set several traps that
spill intruders into the lake from holes dug into the cliffs.
The leader of the dwarves is a scoundrel called Gwael, who wears
a striped kilt and arms himself with a coat of mail, a buckler and a
broadsword. He wears a long, golden earring in one ear and a conical
helm set with tiny opals. His dwarves number 1d20+15. They have living
quarters dug into the mine and do a fairly good business in gold and silver
ore and bits of valuable rose quartz.
The lake connects to a trading post higher in the mountains (and located
next to a mountain pass), and the traders there take turns coming down
the river in keel boats to fetch loads of ore. The ore is lowered via barrels
and ropes from the mine entrance above. The traders are very cognizant
of the quippers, and take care not to fall into the water.

The quipper is a rare form of cold-water piranha. They are dark green
in color and are found in freshwater lakes and stream. Quippers attack by
swarming an opponent and biting with their razor-sharp teeth.
A quipper that detects blood in the water goes into a killing frenzy, as do
all other quippers within a 90-foot radius. Frenzied quippers attacks until
either they or their opponents are dead.
A frenzied quipper can make two attacks each round. Additionally, it
gains a +1 bonus on attack rolls and a 1 point bonus to AC. A frenzied
quipper's swim speed increases by 3. This frenzy lasts for 1 minute (10
rounds) and can only be used once per encounter.

Credit: The quipper originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend Folio (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Albie
Fiore.

Frenzy of Greed
In mountains rich with quartz, gold and silver, a band of greedy dwarves
has made a home for themselves in a mine dug into a rocky slope
overlooking a cold, mountain lake. The lake is ringed by tall cliff walls
that support a few evergreen shrubs large flocks of blackbirds.

Racoon
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2 hp
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d2)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: None
Move: 4/4 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: A/5

Raccoons are about the size of a small dog with brownish-grey fur and
a bushy tail ringed in black. Their paws and ears are black, and they have
a black-and-white mask-like marking on their faces. Raccoons are small
nocturnal omnivores that live in all but the warmest and coldest forests.
They are curious animals and like to steal whatever they can carry off.

Thieves in the Night
Campers in the Kriegh Forest must keep track of their belongings
as roving bands of feral raccoons plunder any item they can carry off.
Travelers tell tales of waking with the sun to find everything but their bed
missing. The raccoons are the furry eyes and stealthy hands of a group
of primeval raccoons that live in the forest's depths. The raccoons take
their stolen goods to these larger animals as tribute. PCs camping in the
forest are targeted by the furry bandits, with anything left on the ground
– including clothes, food, tent spikes, books and weapons – carried off by

the opportunistic critters. By the time PCs awake, their items may be far
into the depths of the forest. (See the Raccoon, Primeval entry if PCs go
searching for their missing gear.)

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Racoon, Dire
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4 hp
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Disease
Move: 6/6 (climb)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Dire raccoons are nocturnal animals about the size of a large dog. They
have brownish-grey fur, and a bushy tail ringed in black. Its paws and ears
are black as well, and it has a black and white mask-like marking on its
face. The bite of a giant raccoon can spread disease.

King of Thieves
The abandoned ruins of Morgal-Uth sit silently in the heart of the
Kriegh Forest, the once-proud stone village overgrown by towering
elms and oaks. The village is the home of a family of 8 primeval
raccoons. Most are the size of large dogs, but the matron is about
the size of a small brown bear, standing nearly 6 feet tall when she
rises onto her hind feet. The normal raccoons revere these larger
cousins and instinctively bring “tribute” to these giant animals. The
primeval raccoons now live a life of excess and don’t have to hunt on their own.
Mundane items are scattered within the stone ruins. Any equipment PCs might
have lost to the thieving raccoon family may be scattered anywhere within
the ruins. The family of primeval raccoons doesn’t take kindly to anyone
“stealing” from them, and ambush PCs at every opportunity. They
are often accompanied by normal raccoons that leap from trees and
ruins to bite and scratch intruders.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Rhinoceros, Woolly
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 10
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: 1 horn (2d6)
Saving Throw: 5
Special: Double damage on charge
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 10/1,400

The woolly rhino averages about 11 feet long and has two ivory horns,
the longest averaging about 3 feet in length. Its body is covered in a thick
layer of black, brown, ruddy, or yellowish-brown fur that enable it to
withstand its harsh climate. The creature has poor eyesight, and relies
on its senses of hearing and smell to locate sources of food and warn of
impending danger. If a rhino charges, it tramples its opponent and does
double damage with its horn attack.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Bull (Rhino) in a China Shop
The sound of glass shattering and screams fill the street of the river
community of Shalebend. People flee in panic down the dusty main street
that splits the village. Mooing and squeaking noises can be heard in a
large glass foundry called “Morto's Glassworks.”

A female woolly rhinocerous and its mate, a prehistoric rhino called
an elasmotherium, swam through the Shale River and charged into the
rear of the buildings built along the edge of the water. The elephant-size
elasmotherium knocked a hole in the back of the glass shop big enough
for both animals to hide inside, although just barely. The elasmotherium's
15-foot-body is destroying the shop, and its 6-foot-long single horn is
ripping holes in the roof. The smaller woolly rhinoceros is having an
easier time, although her every movement is knocking over shelves and
trampling delicate glass sculptures.

The rhinos are on the run from a female cave giant named Tolla Tarstump
who raises the rhinos as pets. Each animal has giant glass beads woven
into its furry hide and their long hair is dyed deep purple. The giant is
trying to find her pets. The animals would rather take their chances in the
wild. Both animals charge anyone trying to approach them. Tolla shows
up in 2d4 rounds, angry that the town is hiding her rhinos.

Rhinoceros, Woolly-Elasmotherium
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 2 [17]
Attacks: 1 horn (4d6)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Double damage on charge
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 16/3,200

The elasmotherium stands as tall and as long as an elephant, averaging
almost 15 feet long and weighing around 4 tons. Its fur is thick, and its
underlying body is tough and very resilient. Its single horn is thick, ivory
colored, and almost 6 feet long. Its fur tends to be a bit darker than the
common woolly rhino's. Like its brethren, its eyesight is poor, thus it, too,
relies on its keen sense of hearing and smell. If an elasmotherium charges,
it tramples its opponent and does double damage with its horn attack.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Scythe Horn
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: butt (1d8) or horn-slash (2d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Stampede
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Scythe horns are 10 to 13 feet long and stand 5 to 6 feet tall at the
shoulders. Scythe horns are covered in a thick brownish-black or
brownish-gray fur. Its horns are black or gray and curve upward and
inward in a scythe-like shape. Its legs are short and thick and its black
hooves are circular in shape. An enraged scythe horn butts or slashes with
its scythe-like horns. If startled, a herd generally flees, starting a stampede
in the process. A frightened herd runs over anything in its path, dealing
1d12 points of damage per five scythe horns in the group.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Scimitar Horn
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: horn-slash (2d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Stampede
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A relative of the scythe horn, the scimitar horn is found only in cold
plains and hills. They use the same statistics for the scythe horn, but have
no butt attack, and attack by slashing with their scimitar-like horns.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Lost in the Fog
A thick fog blankets the hills, dropping visibility to barely 10 feet
through the clinging burs and prickly thorns covering the land. The
swampy ground squelches from recent rains, and slick mud makes each
step tricky. A wolf howls in the distance, and is answered by another
nearby predator. In the fog, sounds seem louder and directions are harder
to pinpoint.

A raucous bleating and thrashing from a briar patch can’t be missed. A
herd of scythe horns got lost in the thick fog, and blundered into the briar
patches. One of the young animal's horns is tangled in the thick vines.
The rest of the 14 animals in the herd gather around the trapped animal.
The males thrash at the thorny vines, tearing them out by the roots. The
animals are frantic to free the young scythe horn and be on their way
before a wolf pack trailing the herd catches them. The animals turn their
anger on any PCs who come too near the herd.

Seahorse, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: butt (1d8)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: None
Move: Swim 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 4/120

A giant seahorse is about 8 feet long from the top of its head to the tip of
its tail. Its body is covered in fine scales and its head is horse-like with
a long snout. Its back is lined with small dorsal fins. Near the base of its
head are pectoral fins that help the giant seahorse turn while swimming.
A giant seahorse ranges in color from yellow to dull green or brown.
Its eyes are almost always brown with the occasional giant seahorse
having blue eyes.

The Seahorse King
Princess Polyena has lost her crown … but she knows
exactly where to find it. She was swimming off her dad's
barge, when it fell off her head and into the pearlescent
waters of the stretch of ocean her father rules. She
immediately ordered her servants to dive in to get it back,
but not a single one of them did as she ordered and came back
with the gold and diamond crown. She had to lock every single one of
them in daddy's dungeons for disobeying her. Daddy promised to have
another crown made, and she agreed to that idea wholeheartedly, but
she's determined to get back the original as well (it is hers after all).
The crown has been spotted, although no one has figured out how to
get it. When it fell off her golden tresses, it snagged around the curling
tail of a giant seahorse that glides through the ocean near her father's
compound with a herd of 25 other seahorses. The animal doesn’t even
realize the golden tiara is wedged on its body, and how rude is that?
The princess has offered a 1,000 gp reward (which she’ll expect
Daddy to pay) for the return of the crown.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sheep
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 2
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack: Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 16
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 2/30

The statistics here describe the common sheep and ram. Sheep generally
flee from danger and avoid combat if possible. If cornered, they attack by
biting.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sheep, Ram
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack: Gore (1d6)
Saving Throw: 14
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
CL/XP: 3/60

The statistics here describe the common sheep and ram.  Rams are male sheep
and are usually encountered leading a flock.  Rams attack using their horns.
They become aggressive if the flock is threatened.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Sheep Rustlers
In the rolling hill country, the main source of wealth (and conflict) is the
keeping of sheep. A large flock of 1d10x10 sheep (plus one ram per 10
adults and 50% as many noncombatant lambs) roams one hill in particular.
A village is located at the bottom of the hill and consists of a number of
red brick cottages with thatched roofs running parallel to a rushing stream.
A wooden bridge allows one to cross the bridge to the hills beyond. The
village has no tavern or inn, and is populated by freemen who make a living
selling wool to a canny old trader with a touch of orc blood who comes up
in the fall with a caravan of wagons and guardsmen. The village has a few
warriors equipped with longbows and short swords and wearing leather or
ring armor, but it mostly relies on the patrols of the nearby baron.
There is a 1 in 10 chance, one evening, that a band of raiders attempts to
rustle the sheep. The raiders wear bearskin cloaks and odd bits of armor
and are armed with axes and darts. Their leader is a frightening old man
with long, white hair and one blind eye that emits a silver radiance. The
old man is a 6th level fighting-man. He wears a coat of mail and carries
a spear and silver sword. He also owns a mithril harp set with a single
sapphire that, when plucked, allows him to control animals. The raiders
will attack any guards while their master plays his harp and leads the
sheep into the deep hills.

Skunk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1d4
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack: Bite (1d4)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Musk
Move: 12
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: A/5

The stats here describe the common nonaggressive skunk. Skunks
squirt their musk at potential predators in hopes of forcing the predator to
flee. If this fails, the skunk looks for the quickest route possible for itself
to escape. If cornered, a skunk bites its opponents.
Once per round, and no more than 5 times per day, a skunk can release
a cloud of stinking musk that quickly fills a 5-foot area in front of it. A
creature within or entering the area must succeed on a saving throw or be
sickened for 1d4 rounds. One round later a second saving throw must be
made (whether the first one succeeded or not) or the affected creature is
blinded for 1d4 rounds.
A neutralize poison spell removes the effect from the sickened creature,
but does not remove the blindness. Creatures with immunity to poison are
unaffected by the sickened effect but can still be blinded if they fail their
save, and creatures resistant to poison receive their normal bonus on both
saving throws.
The stench is highly potent, and short of magical means of cleaning, all
cloth and such material continue to reek for 1d6 months. The odor is so
strong that it doubles all chances for wandering monster encounters and
imposes a severe penalty on attempts to hide in shadows while wearing
clothing contaminated with a skunk's musk. Flesh, leather goods, metal
goods (weapons, armor, and the like) must be washed in a concentrated
mixture of vinegar for a period of 1d3 days. Otherwise, the stench clings
to them for at least 1 week, imposing the same modifiers to wandering
monster encounters and hide in shadows checks.

Skunk Femerell
A slim, crooked tower of bleached limestone dominates an otherwise
barren, rocky landscape. A bright, greenish light shines from the top of
the tower, casting long, hideous shadows across the morose landscape.
The source of the light is a simple lanthorn of emerald panels and wrought
iron. While the lanthorn illuminates a dark environment with its green
light, it casts twilight in a 1 mile radius when brought into bright light.
Two armies are encamped on the plain, surrounding the tower and
locked in a stalemate over its possession. One army is composed of 300
goblins, the other of 360 kobolds. Both races are sensitive to light an
contemptuous of the surface races, and thus would like to claim the magic
lanthorn.
Currently, one force stops them - a family of 1d4+1 skunks. The skunks
have taken up residence in the tower, feeding on rats and insects and
defending their home with a tenacity matched only by the cowardice of
the goblins and kobolds.

Credit: The Skunk originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual II
(© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1983) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Smilodon (Saber-Toothed Cat)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 6
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4+1), 1 bite (2d6)
Saving Throw: 11
Special: Rear claws
Move: 12/6 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Smilodons average about 5 feet long and weigh nearly 500 pounds, but
can grow to a length of 8 feet and weigh up to 900 pounds. Their fur is
golden or spotted (similar to a leopard). Their legs are short but powerful
and their tail is short and bobbed. The smilodon has two 8-inch long,
downward-curving canine teeth. These saber-like fangs are very sharp
and are used for stabbing prey. This creature can open its jaws almost
twice as far as other big cats. If a smilodon hits with its two front claws, it
can pull itself up to rake with its rear claws (2 additional attacks).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Big, Sharp Teef
A 6-year-old approaches the PCs, her golden hair done up in bouncing
polka-dot pigtails. Her frilly blue dress is wrapped in delicate white lace.
But her expression is stern as she crosses her arms and demands in a
babyish voice, “You better give me what I want, or you’ll be sorry.”
And Coralee means it, too. She is the only daughter of Corrigan Sheel,
the only entrepreneur in Sheel (named after his grandfather, who founded
the village). Coralee's mother died in childbirth, and her father feared
the worst would befall his precious little girl. So he found his darling
daughter a companion and protector, a trained smilodon named Teef.
Coralee learned over the years that shop owners give her whatever she
wants when Teef is around. Despite her age, she's developed into quite
the little bully. Even her father backs off punishing the girl when Teef
gives him a look.

If Coralee gets whatever catches her fancy, she skips off with the
treasure to a secret treehouse in the woods where she keeps her prizes.
If she doesn’t get what she wants, her expression darkens and she yells
“Get’em, Teef.” The smilodon lurks in the woods awaiting just such a
command.

Smilodon, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 15
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d6+1) and 1 bite (3d6+1)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Rear claws
Move: 12/6 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

This massive golden-furred cat is about 10 feet long. It has short, powerful
legs and a small, bobbed tail. Two 12-inch long, downwardcurving canines
protrude from its mouth. Giant smilodons are larger, much more aggressive
versions of the standard smilodon. If a giant smilodon hits a single opponent
with both claw attacks, it grabs the victim and rakes it with its rear claws
for an extra 2d6+1 points of damage.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Smilodon, Homotherium
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 7
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: 2 claws (1d4+1), 1 bite (2d4)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: Rear claws
Move: 12/6 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 8/800

This white-furred saber-toothed cat is a relative of the smilodon but
makes its home in arctic regions. Its canines are much shorter than the
smilodon (averaging only about 4-5 inches long) and its front legs are
longer than its rear legs (similar to a hyena's leg structure).

The Clan of the Great Cat
On the mountainous edge of civilization lies the receding Wailing
Glacier that is home to the reclusive primitive people called the Clan of
the Great Cat. The Neanderthal clan seldom interacts with cultured races
other than to wage war. These fierce legendary warriors are experts with
primitive weaponry. Each member carries ingrained combat knowledge
that increases with age. They pass these skills on to their children.
Clan members adorn themselves with mail made from bone. Each
warrior wears a helm fashioned from the skull of a saber-toothed
tiger. These helms are masterfully created and passed down through
generations. They wear clawed bone gauntlets and wield saw-toothed
swords. The clan has domesticated smilodons and even has trained a few
giant smilodons as mounts.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Stingray, Small
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 1
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: tail sting (1d3 + poison)
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Poison
Move: 30 (swim)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Stingrays are completely flat with no discernible head. At
one end is a long, whip-like tail that ends in a razor-sharp
and serrated barb. Their eyes appear as small bumps on the
end opposite the tail and their mouth is located on the underside
of their body. The sides of a stingray are composed of large, wide
pectoral fins (mistakenly referred to as wings sometimes). Stingrays are
brown, black, or slate gray and their underbelly is white. Small stingrays
are about 3 feet across, while the largest ray measures 12 feet across. A
stingray's tail sting causes paralysis. Small stingrays paralyze opponents
for 1d3 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Stingray, Medium
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attacks: tail sting (1d6 + poison)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Poison
Move: swim 30
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

Stingrays are completely flat with no discernible head. At one end is a long,
whip-like tail that ends in a razor-sharp and serrated barb. Their eyes appear
as small bumps on the end opposite the tail and their mouth is located on the
underside of their body. The sides of a stingray are composed of large, wide
pectoral fins (mistakenly referred to as wings sometimes). Stingrays are
brown, black, or slate gray and their underbelly is white. Small stingrays are
about 3 feet across, while the largest ray measures 12 feet across.
A stingray's tail sting causes paralysis. Medium stingrays paralyze opponents
for 1d4+1 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Stingray, Large
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 8
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attacks: tail sting (1d8 + poison)
Saving Throw: 8
Special: Poison
Move: swim 30
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 9/1,100

Stingrays are completely flat with no discernible head. At one end is a long,
whip-like tail that ends in a razor-sharp and serrated barb. Their eyes appear
as small bumps on the end opposite the tail and their mouth is located on the
underside of their body. The sides of a stingray are composed of large, wide
pectoral fins (mistakenly referred to as wings sometimes). Stingrays are
brown, black, or slate gray and their underbelly is white. Small stingrays are
about 3 feet across, while the largest ray measures 12 feet across.
A stingray's tail sting causes paralysis. Large stingrays paralyze opponents
for 1d6+2 rounds.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Water Hazard
Ocean waves crash on the rocky beach in heavy riptides that pull sand
and rock into the water. The land angles sharply down to the waterfront,
where a small group of people stand on the beach. A small boy lies on his
side on a sandbar rising slightly out of the water about 50 feet offshore. In
the water between the boy and the shore, a man's body floats face down
in the waves, bobbing in the surf.
Lying in the sand about 30 feet offshore is a large stingray. The creature
is perfectly camouflaged in the dirt and tides, its coloration making it
difficult to spot until it moves.
The boy waded into the surf on a dare, then became stuck when the
stingray stung him just as he reached the sandbar. He collapsed in a
paralyzed heap on the rise, safe but unable to move and warn rescuers.
The first man into the water wasn’t so lucky and was stung and fell
facedown into the water. The man has just a few minutes until he drowns.

Tiger Barb, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Attack: Bite (1d6)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: None
Move: 0/15 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240


The giant tiger barb is peach with black-striped gills that resemble the
stripes of a tiger. It is 10 to 15 feet long and weighs about 50 pounds.
Tiger barbs sustain themselves on a diet of plants, but eat any sort of food
if hungry. They are very territorial and attack anything that enters their
domain.

Fish Spy
Traversing a deep level of a dungeon, one comes upon a large chamber.
The chamber measures 50 feet in length and 30 feet in width with a ceiling
30 feet high. The walls of the chamber are composed of orange stone
carved to look as though they are covered by grape vines. The chamber
is girded by a stone platform fifteen set feet above the floor. The chamber
has four doors, all on the 30 foot walls and one at floor level and one
at platform level. The chamber is filled with fifteen feet of water. Three
pillars, each 20 feet tall and 6 feet in diameter, run down the middle of
the chamber between the facing doors. The pillars are approximately 15
feet apart. Set in the bottom of the each pillar is a locked copper door. The
water that fills the chamber is murky, hiding those doors from those above
the surface of the water.

The chamber is inhabited by 1d6+5 giant tiger barbs. Where the fish get
their food is unknown (perhaps one of the nearby dungeon denizens), but
they are commonly kept hungry and thus more aggressive.
The doors in the pillars open inward and drain the chamber of water - it
and the tiger barbs flowing into another chamber below. Once the water
has flowed past (and the opener of the door has managed not to be swept
away), one will see a ladder of copper rungs in each pillar leading up to
a small trapdoor. The trapdoor in each pillar leads into a small chamber
(4 feet in diameter and 8 feet tall) lined with a mosaic of mirrors. One
pillar's mirrors are capable of showing things happening at that moment
on the level above. Another is capable of showing things happening at
that moment on the current level. The third shows events on the level
below. The mirrors are activated by concentration alone.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Tuatara, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 5
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Attacks: 1 bite (1d8)
Saving Throw: 12
Special: None
Move: 6/3 (burrow)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

A giant tuatara is a burrowing reptile with a sharp beak designed to
crack and tear through the carapace or scaled hide of its prey. The creature
is about 10 feet long and weighs close to 400 pounds. Its color ranges
from gray or olive to dull red. It lacks ears but has two small openings on
either side of its head that seem to function as such. On top of its head is
a “third eye” (or parietal eye) that helps the tuatara to regulate its body
temperature. Males have a noticeable crest down the center of its neck
and back; females have the same crest, but it is much less pronounced.
Tuataras stalk their prey at night, having excellent vision in low light and
a keen sense of smell. When threatened, a tuatara inflates its body, raises
and flares its crest, and darkens the scales between its shoulders and neck.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

Gladiator Pit
A crude gladiator pit sits in an otherwise desolate land. The stone-lined
pit sits 20 feet in the ground. Blood and bodily fluids stain the sandy dirt. A
few body parts and pieces of armor dot the ground. Sturdy planks serving
as bleachers surround the pit. Scavengers scratch through the mounds of
trash looking for morsels. The spectators, gamblers and vendors have all
gone until the next games, leaving smoldering fire pits, grooved wagon
trails and waste of all kinds. Wooden cages to hold captives, animals and
fighters sit empty behind the bleachers.
A giant tuatara remains in the pit. The lizard is slightly wounded but
otherwise alert. A chain binds one its back legs to a post in the center of
the pit. A young human man clings to life at the top of a 30 foot post in
the pit. The man self-impaled his hands onto iron spikes near the top of
the pit to prevent falling. He has been trapped here for four days and is on
the brink of death. The chain does not allow the lizard to reach the man.
The post is 25 feet from the edge of the pit.
The man is a local mercenary who failed to fulfill a contract and was
sold into slavery. After he climbed to the top and impaled his hands,
the crowd grew bored and left. The games are closed until the master
of ceremonies arranges another night of fighting, gambling and carnage.

Turtle, Giant Snapping
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 12
Armor Class: 1 [18]
Attack: Bite (2d8)
Saving Throw: 3
Special: Swallow whole
Move: 6/9 (swimming)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 13/2300

Giant snapping turtles are very large and very aggressive versions of
their smaller cousins. They are found in large lakes, rivers, and inland
seas. The average giant snapping turtle is 40 feet in diameter, but they can
grow to a diameter of 75 feet.
A giant snapping turtle lurks near the shore or on the bottom of a body
of water, where it remains motionless and hidden in its shell. When prey
passes near, it shoots its neck out and bites.
The victim of a giant snapping turtle's bite must pass a saving throw to
avoid being swallowed whole. Once inside, the opponent takes 2d8 points
of crushing damage plus 1d8 points of acid damage per round from the
turtle's stomach. A swallowed creature can cut its way out by using a light
slashing or piercing weapon to deal 25 points of damage to the stomach
(AC 3 [16]). A giant snapping turtle's interior can hold up to 8 humansized victims.

Credit: The Giant Snapping Turtle originally appeared in the First Edition
Monster Manual (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Turtle Star
Any group of adventurers looking for (insert name of an artifact or
powerful magic item from your campaign here) must eventually come to
the vast Skeletal Sea. The “skeletal” in the sea's name refers not to human
or animal remains, but to the remnants of buildings. Two or three hundred
years ago, a vast, fruitful plain was flooded - perhaps a god or goddess
took a disliking to the men of the plains or an earthquake drained a lake
in the mountains.
Whatever the cause of the flooding, the people of the plain were forced
to settle elsewhere, leaving their towns and villages behind. The stone
ruins of those buildings remain, and one in particular holds interest
for treasure seekers. The ruin in question is an ancient temple. All that
remains of the temple are three walls, one with an arched opening into
the flooded courtyard and a large, stained glass window on the opposite
wall. The stained glass window depicts a warrior saint engaged in combat
with a green wyrm. Above the saint's head is a constellation with one star
larger than the others. Other clues in the window suggest that one must
follow that large star in the dead of winter for 30 miles from this spot.
At that point there is a dungeon in which the artifact in question resides.
Figuring out the clues in the window would be trying enough if one
didn’t have to tangle with the 1d3+1 giant snapping turtles that have made
the ruined temple their home.
