s15: Varlets and Vermin, Copyright 2010, Roger S. G. Sorolla

Vulture, Doom
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Hit Dice: 2
Attacks: Beak 1d4
Saving Throw: 16
Special: None
Move: 3/15 (flying)
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

These foul and cowardly birds do not attack the unharmed, but will always
prefer to attack whoever in a group has lost the most hit points, no matter
what their level or equipment. Larger and more aggressive than normal
vultures, small numbers of the doom breed circle high over dungeon entrances,
battlefields, and other places from whence the grievously wounded are known to
stagger.


Mithridatium Bush
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Hit Dice: 3
Attacks: None
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Sleep cloud; immunities
Move: 0
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

This plant appears to be a shrub or hedge with tightly closed pods. On the
close approach of living creatures, the pods open, revealing exotic
blackish-crimson flowers that exhale soporific pollen throughout a 5 foot
range. All within range must save (as poison) or fall into a dreamless sleep,
with grogginess lasting a full hour after waking. The bush is not harmed by
blunt, piercing, or missile weapons. Local folklore hints at woeful
consequences if its leaves and branches are burned, but what these consequences
are exactly, if anything, is something for the referee to decide.


Strangle Vines
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Hit Dice: 2
Attacks: 3 whips; strangle 1d3/round
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Entangle, immunity
Move: 0
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A mass of animated, carnivorous vines that lash out at random when approached
closely. If they hit on an exact multiple of 4, they ensnare the throat and do
1d3 damage that and each subsequent round, otherwise a hit merely entangles the
victim's limbs (-2 to hit and +2 to be hit per entangling). The vines are not
harmed by blunt, piercing, or missile weapons.


Razor Thorns
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Hit Dice: 2
Attacks: 2 whips, 1d3 each
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Immunity, bonus vs. unarmored, thorns.
Move: 0
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Cousin to strangle vine, this tangle of malicious thorny vines will lash out at
random when approached closely, with +2 to hit against an unarmored opponent.
Unlike strangle vines, they do not ensnare victims, but have the same immunity
to blunt, piercing, or missile weapons. The thorns are detachable and stick in
the flesh, so that the wounds do not heal until all the thorns have been
plucked out, taking 1 round/hit point damage.

Trickster Beast
Armor Class: 4 [15] (counting +4 dexterity and luck bonus)
Hit Dice: 1d4 hit points
Attacks: None
Saving Throw: 14 (counting +4 dexterity and luck bonus)
Special: Minor illusions
Move: 15
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

These quick-thinking, fast-talking animals come from a smaller mammal species,
be they rabbits, foxes, monkeys, or whatever fits the area. They are able to
walk on their hind legs and to change their appearance magically, appearing as
a small-sized creature such as a dwarf or gnome, or a man-sized creature if one
sits on the other's shoulders. They can also create sound and glowing light
illusions at will to a range of 60 feet. Trickster beasts usually are out to
relieve adventurers of their treasure by deception, but sometimes they team
with more malicious creatures to create a lethal ambush. A few times they even
really do intend to help the party on their mission.


Rat, Panzer
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Hit Dice: 1d4 hit points
Attacks: Bite, 1d3
Saving Throw: 18
Special: 5% chance of disease
Move: 9
Challenge Level/XP: A/5

Armored breeds of rats include both the mutant strains with keratinous plating,
and the rarer and more disturbing examples of rats who have managed to clothe
themselves in small helmets and mail coats.  These stats, without the disease,
can also represent hostile armadillos, tortoises, or horned toads.


Rat, Scaler
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Hit Dice: 1d4 hit points
Attacks: Bite, 1d3
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Surprise on 1-4, 5% disease
Move: 12, 6 on walls/ceilings
Challenge Level/XP: A/5

It is either adhesive, sucker-tipped toes, or steely hooked claws, that allow
these grayish-brown mutant rats to scale walls and hang from ceilings in the
dungeon. Their self- righting instinct is as sure as a cat's, allowing them to
drop and dive jaws-first on passers-by. Scaler rats can be re-imagined as
hostile, gecko-like lizards, or perhaps giant black squirrels in a woodland
setting.

Rat, Miner
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Hit Dice: 1d4 hit points
Attacks: Claws, 1d3+1
Saving Throw: 18
Special: +2 to hit vs. armor, surprise on 1-4
Move: 12, 3 through earth
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

Shallow dungeon levels are often dug into packed earth or clay. In such an
environment a digging pest can thrive, and so the vicious Miner Rats are found
in their tiny and labyrinthine burrows, ready to pop out of walls or ceilings
to assault the unwary. Minerals in their diet help build their tough,
armor-punching claws. These stats can also model aggressive breeds of moles,
badgers, or prehistoric horned gophers.  Tougher Miner types are rumored to
exist at lower levels, with red-hot claws that crack and melt through solid
stone.

Rat Swarm
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Hit Dice: 2 (attacks as ½ HD)
Attacks: Up to 4 per person in area, 1 damage each
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Damage resistant
Move: 12
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Swarming rats are individually of normal size but are bound together by
ravening hunger, collective intelligence, or foul magic. These stats represent
a fearsome pack of some two score rats spread over a roughly 10 by 5 foot area.
Even one of these can challenge a low level party, because it is hard to
protect the weak and wounded from their onslaught. Their bites do little damage
individually but there are many of them. The pack will move to engulf the
maximum number of victims allowed by its area. Anyone within the swarm's area
takes 4 attacks per round while those on the borders fighting it take 2.
Attacks without area effect, such as weapon strikes, can do only 1 point of
damage per hit to the swarm.

The swarm's hit points represent sufficient dead to disperse the rats, but
multiple routed swarms may rally and regroup at some point in the future.
Disease, even at a 5% chance, can be an especially nasty addition to the swarm
due to the high frequency of attacks. These rules can also model any kind of
swarming and biting creatures, from angry frogs to killer bees.

Rat, Zombie
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Hit Dice: 2d4 hit points (attack and are turned as 1 HD creatures)
Attacks: Claws, 1d3
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Disease 15%
Move: 9
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

It may not even be apparent that these are undead creatures until the fighting
begins up close. The disease chance is that much greater, and the rats
themselves are that much tougher, for being undead. These stats will also do
for any kind of zombified small animal.

Botflies, Giant
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Hit Dice: 1
Attacks: Bite, 1d2
Saving Throw: 17
Special: 20% chance to inject larvae; fire vulnerability
Move: 15 (flying)
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Foul insects that feed off carrion and refuse, giant botflies also have a
chance to inject larvae into the body of their victim after a successful bite
attack. The larvae are hard to detect normally at first; they will incubate
under the skin for 1d4+1 days and then burst forth as 2d6 immature botflies (1
HP each, no injection attack) doing 1 point of damage in the process per
hatched fly. Only a cure disease spell or stronger healing magic will destroy
the larvae. If damaged by normal or magical fire, a botfly's wings will burn
off, leaving it unable to fly. Its AC will be 9 [10] and its walking movement
only 3.


Pillbugs, Giant
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Hit Dice: 1-1
Attacks: Bite, 1d3
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Roll up (AC, save improved by 4)
Move: 6, or 9 rolling
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Pillbugs dwell among rotting garbage and wood, and where these things are piled
in huge heaps, the giant variety can be found. With tough armored plates
overlapping like banded mail, these three-foot long, many-footed insects are
hard enough to hit. But when they have taken half or more of their hit points
in damage, they roll up into an armored ball. In this form the pillbug is even
harder to hit (armor class and saves improved by 4), cannot attack, and moves
to escape danger by a strange kind of gyroscopic rolling.


Chartreuse Crud
No stats (Special)

Chartreuse crud is a sickly yellow- green infestation that resembles a slithery
lichen     composed     of feathery, overlapping scales. It is photophobic,
fleeing from even dim light with remarkable quickness, pooling in dark shadows,
corners, and crannies. Pieces of clothing, heaps of garbage or rubble, and
treasure sacks are particularly nasty hiding places for the crud.

There is disagreement on the exact nature of its danger to explorers, and it is
possible that different strains exist with different effects. If uncertain
about the basic facts of chartreuse crud, roll d6 on this table:

1: Hallucinogenic effect on touch; character is confused (as confusion spell) and must save every hour to regain wits from this spell-like effect.
2: Corrodes metal as a rust monster, but any kind of metal, not just ferrous.
3: Eats leather, wood, hair, and other non-living substances of plant or animal origin.
4: Is harmless, but sticks to hands and feet, or their coverings, making them slippery (-2 to hit while on hands, +2 to be hit while on feet).
5: Enters the bloodstream; every 6 hours, save or lose 1 HP from poison-like effects until cure disease is applied.
6: Roll twice more for two effects; if 6 is rolled again, this has the poison-like effect "on contact, save at +2 or die."

A light spell cast directly on the crud will destroy it, but other normally
destructive means such as fire or acid will have no effect on it.


Golem, Scrap
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Hit Dice: 2 (10 hp)
Attacks: Strike, 1d6-1
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Surprise (1-4), takes half damage from piercing weapons and fire
Move: 3
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

"Golem" may be a misnomer, as it is hard to see how or why these
conglomerations of refuse would have been animated intentionally.  Rather than
towering over its foes, a scrap golem uses natural disguise to leap at them,
snaking out ropy tendrils of flying debris. Each damage result from 0-5
represents a hit by a different component of the golem.

0: Rotten food, no damage
1: Bone piece, 25% chance of lodging in wound
2: Wood splinter, 50% chance of lodging in wound
3: Blunt brick piece
4: Sharp stone fragment
5: Sharp rusty metal scrap, 50% chance of lodging in wound, then further 50% of contracting dungeon tetanus (fatal within 1-4 days).

Items lodged in the wound from damage prevent healing of those hit points until
carefully removed (1 round per hit point of damage).


Translucent Worms
Armor Class: 9 [10], -4 to be hit in habitat
Hit Dice: 1d4 hit points
Attacks: Bite/burrow, 1d4
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Translucent (surprise 1-4 in habitat), flesh burrowing, splitting.
Move: 6
Challenge Level/XP: B/10

Translucent worms have about the thickness of a good piece of rope and stretch
from one to four feet long, a length reflected by their hit point roll. Their
normal habitat is in piles of rotting refuse or vegetation, but they can also
be found in dirt and murky water. If they roll a 4 for damage on their attack
they have burrowed into the flesh of the victim and automatically hit each
round thereafter until dead, but no longer benefit from their habitat penalty
to be hit.

Hard as it is to believe, flesh burrowing is not the most annoying trait of
translucent worms. Indeed, when a worm of 2 or more hit points is struck by a
physical attack, this only splits the worm into two worms, dividing the hit
points of the former worm between them.  The "rear" worm spends 1 combat round
re-forming mouth parts and then joins the fray. Only a 1 hp worm can be slain
by striking. Fire and other area effects damage the worms normally.


Fungi, Saucer
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Hit Dice: Saucer 1+1, stalk 1
Attacks: Saucer edge 1d4
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Launch saucer
Move: Saucer 12 (flying), stalk 0
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

These two to four foot tall mushrooms will detach their saucer caps and send
them flying at intruders who approach within 90 feet. In flight, the saucers
extend sharp edges capable of cutting rope, flesh, or leather. If the saucer
misses its target or hits for 1 or 2 points, it returns to the stalk, which
spends a combat round recharging it for the next throw. If the stalk is
destroyed, the corresponding saucer flops to the ground.

Eye Droppers
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Hit Dice: 1+1
Attacks: Bite 1d6
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Surprise 1-5
Move: 3
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

The basic form of an eye dropper is a gelatinous swirl of transparent
protoplasm about the size of a sack.  Its name comes from two unsettling
features. Over its lifetime it accumulates the teeth and eyes of its victims,
preserved within its plasm and put to work as new body parts. It also is able
to climb walls and ceilings and will often wrap itself around a stalactite or
lintel, from where it will drop on its prey.  If its roll is enough to hit AC
10 (with any dexterity bonuses) it will adhere to the victim, attacking at +4
thereafter.

Meat Slugs
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Hit Dice: 2
Attacks: Bite 1d4
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Sticky slime
Move: 6
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

The slow moving meat slug is found in the food pens of strange underground
races, though some wild slugs persist in shallower caverns. Meat slugs dine on
wall scum, fungus, mold and anything else they can get their leech-like mouths
on. Their slime is thick and sticky. If a melee weapon does maximum damage to
the slug, it will be stuck, requiring a combat round to free. Also, anyone who
treads on its 60 foot long slime trail must stop and loses half his or her
move, this round and next.


Degenerates
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Hit Dice: 1
Attacks: Crude weapon 1d6
Saving Throw: 17
Special: None
Move: 12
Challenge Level/XP:

Degenerates descend from human slaves used as the meat animals of abominable
subterranean races.  Although they walk upright and wear crude garments, these
pale- skinned cannibals have been bred down to a dog-like intelligence and have
no moral scruples whatsoever.  In parleying, they appear to use words of the
common tongue, but really it is a parrot-like regurgitation of random
vocabulary and scraps of the other party's conversation. Their own behavior
will complement the attitude of the adventurers. If approached with fear and
caution, they will surge forward and attack; if approached aggressively, they
will cower and submit; if approached with offers to cooperate, they will gladly
agree, all the while looking for advantage and a chance to dine on fresh flesh.
They make interesting slaves or antagonists of humanoid tribes, as their human
form may attract misguided sympathy from the explorers.


Moth, Fire
Armor Class: 7 [12], -2 to be hit with melee weapons
Hit Dice: 1
Attacks: Fire 1d6/ 1d3
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Immune to fire
Move: 18 flying
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

With the way moths are fatally attracted to flame, it was only a matter of time
before the first giant fireproof moths mutated and spread, in inhabited
underground caverns where fires and lava flows are often lit. A fire moth has
no attack in itself, but sweats an oily secretion that catches fire easily.
The now-blazing moth will then ram into its foes for 1d6 fire damage on a
successful hit, or fly overhead and drip flaming oil which hits for 1d3 damage.
Low-level parties prone to carrying open torch flames and starting oil fires
have a distinct hatred for these insects.


Amphibious Jumping Tiger Shark
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Hit Dice: 2
Attacks: Bite 1d6+1
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Leap
Move: 18 swimming, 9 on land
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30XP

Only a mad wizard beginning to run out of ideas could have created this
striped, furred, man-eating abomination. The size and shape of a five-foot-long
shark, it also sports two powerful cat-like hind legs that retract partly into
its body for streamlined swimming. On land it uses its legs to leap up to 30
feet horizontally or 10 feet vertically. If can submerge itself at least 10
feet for buoyancy and momentum, it can make a similar jump out of the water.

Greenhair
Armor Class: is hit automatically
Hit Dice: 2+4
Attacks: Entangle
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Attack immunity, entangle
Move: 0
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15XP

Growing thickly in underground waters, these carnivorous weedy strands possess
a dim and malevolent sentience. A single greenhair clump covers a roughly 5
feet square area and can float as high as 10 feet in deep enough water.
Greenhair does not attack as such, but rather seeks to entangle creatures
moving through its zone, dragging them down and drowning them under the water.

Each person in the area of greenhair must save at the start of each round, -2
if carrying a heavy load, -4 if encumbered. Failing the save once means the
victim cannot move.  Failing a second round's save means the victim is brought
to his or her knees, a third means the victim is brought to hands and knees and
it cannot use their arms, and a fourth means the victim is brought prone.

If any of these take the victim's head underwater, he or she takes drowning
damage per round as appropriate (or 1d6 damage/round if the rules do not cover
drowning).  Greenhair can not be harmed by any weapons other than slashing
melee weapons, but these automatically hit. Killing a greenhair clump releases
its victim.


Ice Nixie
Armor Class: 6 [13] (counting +3 dexterity and luck bonus)
Hit Dice: 1
Attacks: Ice dagger 1d4 in melee; ice darts 1d3 with 20 foot range increment
Saving Throw: 14 (counting +3 dexterity and luck bonus)
Special: Freeze water, ice charm
Move: 9, 15 (swimming)
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Cold-blooded variants of the familiar aquatic fey folk, ice nixies do not
confine themselves to arctic pools, but spread their chill aura to all kinds of
fresh water, including underground. They can cause water to freeze at a range
of 60 feet, up to a cubic foot per combat round. They use the resultant ice to
create all sorts of improvised structures, armaments, and inconveniences.

The ice nixie's charm person power, usable once per day, is different from the
normal nixie charm. It causes the victim's heart to grow cold, rather than
warm, He or she becomes indifferent to the well- being of any comrades, and
acts only in line with self-interest. If this extends to theft, betrayal and
robbery, so be it, but certainly there is no reason to harm the inoffensive and
penniless ice nixie. Only the nixie's will, or its death, will release a victim
from the charm.


Spitting Striders
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Hit Dice: 1
Attacks: Bite 1d6; goo 1d4 with 15 foot range increment
Saving Throw: 17
Special: None
Move: 12 on water, 6 on land
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

If scholars know about these creatures, they surely must debate how insects of
their size and weight can walk on water. Nevertheless, the spitting strider
performs the miracle daily, perhaps aided by the viscous, caustic substance it
spits from its sharp jaws at enemies.  Striders are unsure on land but will
climb up to attack if they are being harassed from afar. If the water surface
becomes choppy, they only move one third as fast.


Torpor Remora
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Hit Dice: 1/2
Attacks: Bite (slowing, no damage)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Torpor
Move: 6
Challenge Level/XP: A/5

Shallow and murky waters are the habitat of the torpor remora, a blackish-green
eel about the size of a small cat. These creatures attack the feet by
preference, using the armor class of a character's footwear (soft leather is AC
8[11], hard leather is AC 7[12], metal shod boots are AC 4[15], full plate
footwear is AC 2[17]).  If a remora hits, it attaches itself, and the victim
must save each round (poison) or undergo the effects of a slow spell, moving
and acting at half speed. Because the remora's bite has a numbing effect,
someone who is hit is not likely to notice it. A slowed person hit by a second,
different remora becomes completely paralyzed. Each hour after the initial
bite, a save is allowed to undo one effect (paralyzed people become slowed,
slowed go back to normal).


Barrel Beast
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Hit Dice: 1 to 3
Attacks: 1d6 kick
Saving Throw: 17, 16 or 14 by hit dice
Special: Overbear, knothole attack 1d6 (10 foot range), damage resistance
Move: 9
Challenge Level/XP: 1-3/15, 30, 60

An innocent looking barrel can come to be stuffed full of the infamous barrel
beast in the same way that a deserted shell is taken over by a hermit crab. One
end of the barrel is missing, and this end sits on the floor while the beast
watches through a knothole. When a living being approaches within 5 feet, the
beast rears up on its long, clam-like, prehensile foot and clobbers the victim
with the barrel, doing 1d4 damage on a successful hit, and knocking him or her
down unless a save is made. Thereafter, the barrel lies on its side, rolling
and hopping around while the beast lashes out in normal melee attacks with its
foot. Every other round the beast also squirts one opponent within 10 feet with
a foul, acidic substance from the knothole, doing 1-6 damage unless he saves.
The barrel beast is easy to hit but all weapon damage against it, except from
chopping weapons like axes, is reduced by 2. When its hit points are at 0 or
lower, the barrel breaks and the beast collapses into an inert, oozing mound of
filth and hair. Different sizes of barrel beast (small keg beasts and big tun
beasts) are known to exist.


Hoard Serpent
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Hit Dice: 1 to 3
Attacks: Bite or tail, as weapon damage.
Saving Throw: 17, 16 or 14 by hit dice
Special: Immunity, surprise on 1-4
Move: 6
Challenge Level/XP: 1-3/15, 30, 60

The hoard serpent is both an embodiment and punishment of greed. It is formed
by eldritch forces from a heap of treasure. Its body is a long, coiling stack
of coins (100-200 of them), and it has 1 or 2 semi- precious gem eyes set in
its head, which is also formed of scaled coins.  It attacks with a weapon from
the hoard, either a dagger set in its jaw, or a sword-sized weapon set in its
tail. It takes no damage from normal fire or missile weapons. 1 HD hoard
serpents are made of copper coins, 2 HD of silver and 3 HD of gold, with each
gem and weapon worth about 10 gp per hit die. When dead, the serpent's
constituent treasure collapses and may be gathered normally.


Man of Wounds
Armor Class: 9 [10]
Hit Dice: Equal to number of weapons stuck in body
Attacks: Weapon, as fighter with level = hit dice
Saving Throw: As fighter with level = hit dice
Special: Damage reversal
Move: 12
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

It is not clear, even to the Man of Wounds himself, whether he has been blessed
or cursed by the magic that makes any weapons that hit him stick in his body
and add to his power. When found, he will have 2 or more weapons stuck in or to
his body, with a hit die for each rolled according to the damage dealt by that
weapon - so, a 1d4 dagger, 2d4 maul and 1d6 sword would give him three
effective hit dice and 3d4 + 1d6 hit points. He also carries a weapon of his
own.

Any weapons that hit him stick to him; roll damage, and add that to his hit
points, then add 1 to his hit dice. The only way to harm the Man of Wounds
other than magic is to grab his weapons (on a bare-handed hit vs. AC 5[14]) and
pull them out of his body, dealing damage equal to the weapon's hit die roll
and reducing his Hit Dice by 1. When all his weapons are gone, the Man of
Wounds' enchantment is broken, and he falls to the ground bleeding with zero
Hit Points.


Insistent Shale
No stats (Special)

Among the many marvels of the elements is a form of stone with the ambition to
turn the world to silicate, petrifying all living or formerly living material
it touches.  This insistent shale, as alchemists call it, appears to be a flat
slab of intensely gray-colored rock, either lying on the ground or worked as a
protective    measure     into    the architecture. Petrified statues of
dungeon animals often announce its presence. Anyone who touches it with naked
flesh must save or be turned to stone. Objects of organic material, such as
wooden poles or leather boots, are also turned to stone by touching it. It can
be damaged only by picks or blunt metal      weapons,     which      hit
automatically. The shale requires 5- 30 points of damage to shatter, depending
on its size - and when it shatters, all with exposed skin within 15 feet are
attacked by flying fragments as a 4 Hit Dice monster, and if hit must save at
+2 or turn to stone. Depending on how the dungeon architect has used it,
insistent shale can be a distraction, an annoyance, or a real threat to
explorers.

Pemblings
Armor Class: 3 [16]
Hit Dice: 1/2
Attacks: Bite 1d4
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Damage immunity
Move: 9, 10 foot leap
Challenge Level/XP: B/5

Pemblings are mindless lesser elemental creatures that look like fist-sized
rocks when dormant.  Awakened, they open a wide mouth full of sharp teeth and
start rolling rapidly toward their prey. They attack by leaping and biting,
take only half damage from edged and pointed weapons, and are immune to normal
fire.


Skull Creeper
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Hit Dice: 1d4 hit points
Attacks: Bite 1d3; strangle
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Damage resistance
Move: 9
Challenge Level/XP: A/5

Sometimes, a necromancer who wants skeletal servants that can fit into tighter
places will wire a human skull onto two sets of hand bones, creating an
unnerving, spider-like scuttling thing. The creeper's first attack on making
contact is a bite. On the second round and thereafter, it will try to hit the
victim's unarmored AC (with dexterity modifiers) to crawl onto the body. If it
succeeds, one round later it will reach the throat and start strangling for 1d6
damage each round. Two creepers count as a whole skeleton both for animate dead
and turning purposes.


Dust of Ages
No stats (Special)

One little-known peril of ancient burial places is the dust that forms from the
bones and bodies of the dead over centuries. If animated by collective regrets
or an evil force, it will billow up when disturbed, forming a cloud of
shifting, vaguely human faces and forms — echoes of those that were.

The roughly 10 by 10 foot dust cloud may be turned as a 2 Hit Die undead
monster. It seeks to engulf any intelligent creatures, who must save the first
round so engulfed, or flee in terror for 1d6 rounds. If the creature stays, the
dust will try more insidious means next round, invading breathing passages
(unless another save is successful) and doing 1d6 choking damage per round.
Weapons and magical spells are useless unless they specifically affect undead.
A sprinkling with consecrated water will settle the dust down, but only for as
long as the water remains.


Cerement
Armor Class: 8 [11]
Hit Dice: 2
Attacks: Touch for 1d3 wisdom drain, envelop for 1d6 wisdom drain
Saving Throw: 16
Special: Damage immunity
Move: 9
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

Haunted winding sheets and grave wrappings, or perhaps the bed sheets in an
accursed tavern room, form the body of this undead creature. It will rise and
attack in a snake-like or human-like parody of form. A successful hit threatens
sanity, draining 1d3 wisdom points from the victim, while a second hit in a row
will allow the creature to envelop its victim for 1d6 wisdom points. When a
character goes below 3 wisdom points he or she becomes catatonically insane,
and at 0 wisdom dies of fright. Wisdom is restored at 1 point per day of rest.
Cerements can only be harmed by fire and slashing weapons.


Fardarrig
Armor Class: 5 [14] (counting +3 dexterity and luck bonus)
Hit Dice: 1+1
Attacks: Thighbone shillelagh 1d4
Saving Throw: 14 (counting +3 dexterity and luck bonus)
Special: Telekinesis of dead; ventriloquism
Move: 15
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Fardarrigs are a type of graveyard leprechaun with brick-red skin.  Their main
goal is to hide and frighten away intruders. Fardarrigs use ventriloquism and a
telekinetic power to move dead corpses or body parts within 30 feet of their
location, up to one whole body at a time. Corpses so animated will seem like a
tough kind of undead. They will attack and take physical damage as a zombie or
skeleton, but the parts may continue to attack after the creature is destroyed.
Not being undead, they cannot be turned or damaged by holy means.  With enough
supply of bodies, even a single fardarrig may create what seems to be a
never-ending stream of undead foes.


Ghost Face
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Hit Dice: 1
Attacks: None
Saving Throw: 17
Special: Spells; breath, save or drain 1d4 Constitution; surprise 1-5; only damaged by magic weapons, holy water, or spells
Move: 9 through stone or walls
Challenge Level/XP: 2/30

A solitary spirit not possessed of enough will to come back as a ghost or
spectre may still manifest itself as a ghost face. The face will appear to
emerge from a wall, door, hedge, or other barrier, appearing much as it did in
life. All within 5 feet of it are exposed to its noxious breath (those reduced
to 0 Constitution die) whose effects last a full day. The face also casts
spells as a 3rd level wizard or evil cleric. It is exceptionally hard to deal
with, using its ability to fade back into the walls and its high surprise
chances to avoid direct attack or turning.


Elemental Nuisance: Air
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Hit Dice: 1d4 hit points
Attacks: Whirling debris (1d2)
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Damage immunity
Move: 18 (as zephyr), 9 (as tornado)
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

This minor air elemental manifests as a zephyr-like breeze, capable of blowing
out torches, scattering held scrolls, and the like. When provoked, it forms
into a small tornado. All within 10 feet of it must save or take 1d2 damage
from debris kicked up by the twister. Being hit by the tornado itself will
knock a bipedal creature of man-size or smaller to the ground. Apart from
damage-dealing spells and magic weapons, the only way to kill an air nuisance
is to stop it moving, smothering it with a cloak-sized (hit for 1d3 damage) or
rug-sized (hit for 1d6 damage) piece of thick fabric.


Elemental Nuisance: Earth
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Hit Dice: 1d6 hit points
Attacks: None
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Trap, damage immunity
Move: 12 in earth, 6 in stone
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

The earth nuisance can be conjured in dirt or stone. Either way, it has a
direct and persistent way of inconveniencing those who tread on it - it
instantly scoops out a shallow pit in its substance and then clamps the pit's
walls onto the victim's feet (save or be trapped and unable to walk). If in
stone, it can not be harmed by any physical means other than blunt weapons, and
in earth, only by sharp weapons when these are used to dig. Furthermore, any
physical hit does 2 less damage to the earth nuisance, unless it is by a pick
or shovel.


Elemental Nuisance: Fire
Armor Class: 6 [13]
Hit Dice: 1d4 hit points
Attacks: Ignite for 1d2
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Ignite, damage immunities and vulnerabilities
Move: 12
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

The fire nuisance is easily spotted, being a flickering, fist-sized yellow
flame that moves quickly along any surface. It is sometimes ordered to conceal
itself in a larger fire or to provide a permanent flame for a wall torch. If it
hits, it rushes onto the victim's hair or clothing and ignites it, causing 1d2
damage on the first round and every round thereafter until the fire is
smothered or doused. It also has a particular fondness for spellbooks and
scrolls.

Being hit by water will damage it - 1d3 for a bottle full, 1d6 for a bucket and
it is also subject to smothering damage just as the air nuisance is. No other
effect except cold-related magic will harm it.


Elemental Nuisance: Water
Armor Class: 7 [12]
Hit Dice: 1d4 hit points
Attacks: Choke
Saving Throw: 18
Special: Ruin items, damage immunities
Move: 9, 15 swimming
Challenge Level/XP: 1/15

Unlike the fearsome wave shape of its larger kindred, a water elemental
nuisance appears as a pool or trickle on land, or as a ripple in a larger
volume of water, with a volume of only a couple of quarts (litres). If it
reaches a character, it will crawl on his or her body and equipment for 1- 3
rounds, dousing lit flames, ruining unprotected scrolls and spellbooks, and
damaging non-magic metal armor with a rapid rusting power so that it will lose
1 AC benefit per round. When this period of time is over, the nuisance will
head for the victim's mouth and throat, and unless a save succeeds will do 1d6
choking damage per round. It can only be destroyed by splashing it to pieces;
thus, only hand-held weapons and impact effects (such as magic missile) will
damage it, and then only for 1 point per hit. What's more, a non-magic metal
weapon that hits will be damaged, taking a permanent -1 damage penalty (minimum
0 damage).
