s15: %(name)s from the Tome of Horrors Complete, Copyright 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and distributed by Frog God Games

Yellow Musk Creeper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 3
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attack: Pollen spray (see below) or 2 tendrils (1d8)
Saving Throw: 14
Special: Create yellow musk zombie, intelligence damage,
pollen spray, rejuvenation
Move: 3
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 5/240

The yellow musk creeper is a slow-moving plant that attacks living creatures
and feeds on their intelligence, eventually turning such creatures into yellow
musk zombies. Creepers can be found in moderate to warm climates or
underground, and are rarely encountered elsewhere.

The plant is a large, green clinging vine with ivy-like leaves of dark green.
Small, dark green bulbs and bright yellow flowers mottled with purple adorn
the plant. The actual root of the plant is a large bulbous, brown sac that
lies beneath the surface of the ground where the yellow musk creeper grows.

Yellow musk creepers lie silent until prey approaches within 10 feet.
The small flowers of the creeper then puff a musky-smelling fine powder
at a single target, attempting to entrance the target. If attacked, a yellow
musk creeper lashes out with its tendrils.

Yellow musk creepers are never encountered alone. They always have
a retinue of yellow musk zombies with them. These zombies will defend
the creeper against all attacks.

A yellow musk creeper can spray a tiny cloud of hypnotic pollen at a single
creature within 30 feet. An opponent hit by the cloud must succeed on a saving
throw or be entranced for 1d4 minutes (as by a charm monster spell). Entranced
creatures can take no action other than to move to the yellow musk creeper. An
entranced creature resists any attempt to halt its progress. A victim within
reach of the yellow musk creeper stands there and offers no resistance to the
monster’s attacks.

A yellow musk creeper can insert hundreds of tiny roots into the head of an
entranced foe within any space occupied by the creeper. An entranced foe does
not resist this attack and does not receive a saving throw to break free of
its entranced state. This attack deals 1d4 points of intelligence damage each
round. A victim reduced to intelligence 0 becomes a yellow musk zombie under
the control of the creeper that created it in 1 hour (see that entry in this
book).

The transformation can be prevented by the casting of neutralize poison
followed by a restoration spell.  A yellow musk creeper can be killed only if
its root is dug up, then burned, hacked apart, or otherwise destroyed.
Reducing the creeper to 0 or less hp puts it out of commission, allowing
excavation of its roots. The main root has an AC of 1 [18] and 10 hp. As long
as the root remains intact, a yellow musk creeper regrows in about 2 weeks.

Credit: The Yellow Musk Creeper originally appeared in the First Edition Fiend
Folio (© TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1981) and is used by permission

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Albie
Fiore.

Do Not Sniff the Yellow Flowers!
In the midst of a jungle there is a low depression with fairly steep,
rocky sides covered with green vines of yellow and purple flowers. The
vines extend into the depression and partially obscure a giant stone head
with a demonic face. The stone head was carved for a stone golem that
was never completed (or, for a more challenging encounter, a stone
golem that was completed and activated and is now buried just under the
surface of the depression.
The vines belong, of course, a yellow musk creeper. Its 1d6 yellow
musk zombies are stationed in the jungle around the depression. It’s not
uncommon for a band of adventurers to be “herded” by the zombies into
the depression and the waiting tendrils of their master.
The stone head contains a crystal matrix composed of a ruby, sapphire,
emerald and diamond encased in a golden sphere. Each jewel is worth
1,000 gp and the gold sphere is worth 500 gp.


Yellowjacket, Giant
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 4 [15]
Attacks: bite (1d3) or sting (1d4 + poison)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Poison, pheromone
Move: 1/20 (flying)
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 6/400

Giant yellowjackets are 8 feet long with alternating bands of black and
yellow on their thorax and abdomen. Workers generally have thicker
black bands than the queen or soldiers. The yellowjacket’s stinger is
slightly curved and barbed and their mandibles are well-formed and
developed, allowing them to chew their food. They attack by biting foes,
saving its sting unless confronting a more powerful opponent. If attacked,
a giant yellowjacket releases a pheromone that makes all yellowjackets in
the area more aggressive (+1 to attack, damage).

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene.

The Apple Orchard
The branches of a dozen blossoming apple trees hang low with ripe
fruit. On the ground around the trunks, daisies, peonies and lilies grow
rampant. Bloody chunks of meat are scattered among the flowers, the
barely identifiable flesh sliced and diced into gory pieces. A goblin lies
in the bushes, its head severed at the neck, and one leg missing entirely.
Blood pools in thick puddles under the grasses. A massive 15-foot-long
snake skeleton is wrapped around the upper branches of one of the apple
trees. The orchard is the home of a nest of giant yellowjackets that drove
the giant snake from its underground burrow and moved in. The snake
was slaughtered in the tree where it crawled to escape, and its flesh used to
feed the young yellowjackets. The yellowjackets live in the underground
warrens, and send 12 warriors out to attack anyone wandering around the
insects’ food sources.

Yeti
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hit Dice: 4
Armor Class: 5 [14]
Attack: 2 claws (1d6)
Saving Throw: 13
Special: Cold, frightful gaze, squeeze, immunity to cold,
double damage from fire, surprise on roll of 1-4 on 1d6 in
snowy areas
Move: 15
Alignment: Neutrality
Challenge Level/XP: 7/600

A yeti is a large, hulking humanoid covered in white, shaggy fur. Its
hands end in razor-sharp claws. The yeti’s head is large and sports a
large round mouth filled with fangs. The typical yeti stands 9 feet tall and
weighs 600 or more pounds.
Yetis make their lairs in remote mountains and hills. They are fierce
predators with ravenous appetites, dining on mountain goats, sheep and
humanoids. They are particularly fond of human and elf flesh.
Creatures within 30 feet that meet the eyes of a yeti must succeed on a
saving throw or stand paralyzed in fear (treat as a hold person spell) for 3
rounds. A creature that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the
frightful gaze of that yeti for one day.
A yeti’s body generates intense cold, dealing 1d6 points of damage to
those that contact it for at least one round. An opponent hit by both of
a yeti’s claw attacks in the same round must pass a saving throw or be
squeezed for 2d6 points of damage (plus 1d6 points of cold damage) each
round the hold is maintained. The victim can escape with an open doors
check.

Credit: The Yeti originally appeared in the First Edition Monster Manual (©
TSR/Wizards of the Coast, 1977) and is used by permission.

Copyright Notice: Author Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary
Gygax.

Everyone Knows They Bounce
An ancient stone lamaserie is constructed on cliffs overlooking a
sprawling village. The lamaserie and village are located on a high
plateau inhabited by blue-furred tigers, takins, gazelles, cranes and snow
chickens.
The villagers keep goats and yaks and grow fields of barley during
their short growing season. The village is ruled by a brotherhood of
1d10+3 monks who dwell in a newer, smaller monastery within the
village. The lama is a 6th level monk named Shamar, a stately, elderly
gentleman with kind eyes and a sharp nose and chin.
The old lamaserie is a sprawling complex with tall walls that have,
over hundreds of winters, developed deep cracks and partially tumbled
to the bottom of the cliff. The lamaserie is two-stories tall and has an
enclosed courtyard and a three-story stone watchtower. Stairs wind up
the side of the cliffs connecting the lamaserie to the village. The stairs
climb 60 feet and are often slick with ice or moisture.
The lamaserie is now inhabited by 1d6+3 yeti. They have made a few
raids into the village and the monks are preparing a response, though
they would much rather hire a band of adventurers to do it for them.
