III. New Magic Items

Black Hands of Perranagg
------------------------
These shrivelled human hands have undergone a necromantic ritual of
burning, transforming them into potent magical charms. Each hand
comes wrapped in cloth, and can be activated by revealing it. The first
character to lay eyes on the hand must save versus paralysis or be
affected by hold person or feign death (selected at random, though a
necromancer may choose).
After it is revealed, the power of the hand expires once its magic has
affected a target. Naturally, one making use of such an item must take
care to not cast his own glance upon it.

Chalice of Geryon
-----------------
Used in various rituals dedicated to the arch-fiend, these chalices are
constructed from the horn of a magical being. The evil magic of the
chalice can be activated once per week by filling it with human blood
and the speaking the correct phrase. The blood in the chalice then
becomes enchanted for 24 hours, and can have one of a number of
effects on a being who drinks it.
Any character of good alignment drinking the blood from the chalice will
be affected by a poison, causing 4d6 points of damage if they fail a
saving throw, and 1d6 damage if the save succeeds. Any character of
chaotic alignment drinking the blood will be affected by sleep. These two
effects are combined for chaotic good creatures who drink the blood
from the chalice.
When the blood is drunk by a character of any other alignment, they are
affected by a powerful charm, causing them to implicitly trust all
followers of the arch-fiend, including devils and imps. The charm effect
lasts for 24 hours. Victims are typically coerced into making a pact with
a summoned devil while under the influence of the charm, and will
thenceforth have great difficulty breaking free of the control of their
diabolic masters, even after the charm wears off.

Codex Prism
-----------
This minor magical item, much used by illusionists in the employ of
guilds and noble houses, is created expressly for use with the codex
series of spells (see the Prism Codex, in section 3). Codex prisms are
relatively easy to create – a suitable prism must be purchased (the usual
cost is 500gp), and can be enchanted for magical use, over a period of
one week, by any illusionist who knows one of the codex spells (the
usual minimum of 9th experience level does not apply).
Once enchanted, the prism can be used to receive and store any
transmuted light pattern which it is exposed to, and can release the light
pattern on demand upon the casting of the reversed form of the spell
which originally produced the pattern. Each codex prism can store but a
single light pattern, with any subsequent patterns replacing the first.
However, once stored, a pattern can be released any number of times,
when the appropriate spell is cast to decode it.
Codex prisms which are found as treasure may contain records of
important events or documents.

Cloak of Protection from Energy Drain
-------------------------------------

This midnight hued cloak protects the wearer from the level draining
attacks possessed by certain undead creatures, and from the effects of
the divineal / necromancer spell drain energy. Each cloak can protect
against a total of 1d6 levels of energy drain, before losing its magic.

Death Ward Ring
---------------

This ring grants the wearer the ability to cheat death. It has a limited
number of charges (typically 1d4 when found), which are automatically
activated when the wearer reaches 0 or less hit points. Each time a
charge is activated, the Referee should roll on the following table
to determine the effect.
Death ward ring, effects of usage
d10 Effect
1–5 Wearer revived to 1hp.
6 Wearer revived to 1hp but permanently loses 1 point of CON or
WIS.
7 Wearer revived to 1hp but becomes resistant to raise dead,
which has a 50% chance of failure the next time it is cast.
8 Wearer revived to 1hp but unconscious for 2d4 days.
9 Damage reflected to its source.
10 Wearer becomes undead (perhaps a ghoul, wight or zombie).

Dreadcube
---------

The origin of these rare and greatly feared magical items is unknown –
no magic-user in his or her right mind would willingly create such a
thing.
A dreadcube is a small rotating 6" iron cube engraved with a complex
series of arcane runes and diagrams. Each cube has a command word,
typically written on its surface. When the command word is spoken by a
magic-user, the cube's power is activated. It will then hover above the
magic-user's palm, and remains there for a duration of one hour.
Each of the cube's six faces contains a dweomer, which can be activated
only once. The powers of the faces are activated under several
conditions, not all of which are under the possessor's control. Firstly, the
magic-user may deliberately activate a face simply by touching it.
Secondly, the power of a random face of the cube will activate as a
reaction upon the casting of any magic-user spell within 60'. Lastly, the
powers of all remaining faces of the cube will activate simultaneously if
the cube itself is targeted with any form of magic (including dispel
magic), or when the one hour duration expires.
The powers of the faces are randomly determined when activated, by
rolling 1d6 – it is not possible to predict which effect a face contains.
Dreadcube, face effects
d6 Effect
1 Lightning bolt affecting a random target within range.
2 Prismatic spray emanating from the cube and oriented in a randomly
determined direction.
3 Dispel magic affecting all magic within range.
4 Polymorph others affecting a random target within range.
5 Summon monster V.
6 Spell resistance affecting a random target within range.
Note that all powers which are randomly targeted are quite able to target
the cube's possessor.

Gem of Orcus
------------

This ruby, engraved in intricate script with an appeal to the demon lord
of the undead, grants a variety of powers to its possessor. Firstly, the
owner gains infravision to 60'. Secondly, for 6 turns once per day the
owner may pass among undead creatures completely unnoticed, as per
the necromancer spell pass undead. Lastly, the gem may be sacrificed in
order to summon aid from the demon lord directly, according to the
following table. Summoned creatures remain for 2d6 turns.
Gem of Orcus, summoning results
d00 Summoned Aid
01–20 2d8 skeletons
21–40 2d6 zombies
41–45 1 vampire
46–55 2d4 mummies
55–70 2d4 ghasts
71–80 1 spectre
81–90 1 marilith demon
91–99 1 glabrezu demon
00 Orcus, Prince of the Undead

Hat of Conjuration
------------------

In the hands of a magic-user, this normal looking hat has the ability to
conjure an endless variety of objects, creatures and spell effects from
thin air. The hat can be used 1d6 times per day. Conjured creatures and
items exist for one turn, before disappearing, and spell effects have their
normal duration. Note that creatures produced by the hat are not in any
way under the magic-user's control.
Spells conjured by the hat will affect any applicable target nearby. In
cases where multiple suitable targets are within range, the actual target
should be determined randomly. Use the following tables to see what
comes out of the hat.
Hat of conjuration, results
d20 Result
1–6 Mundane item (see following table)
7–10 1HD monster (use wandering monster tables)
11–13 1d6 + 1HD monster (use wandering monster tables)
14 1d6 + 5HD monster (use wandering monster tables)
15–16 1st
level spell (from magic-user spell lists)
17–18 Spell of level 1d4 + 1 (from magic-user spell lists)
19 Spell of level 1d6 + 3 (from magic-user spell lists)
20 Magic item (roll on the normal tables)
Hat of conjuration, mundane items
d% Item d% Item d% Item d% Item d% Item
1 Backpack 21 Flint and steel 41 Leather armour 61 Pole arm 81 Spear
2 Banded mail 22 Fur cloak 42 Leather belt 62 Quarterstaff 82 Spell book (blank)
3 Battle axe 23 Garlic (3 cloves) 43 Leather boots 63 Quill pen 83 Splint mail
4 Bedroll 24 Glass vial (empty) 44 Light quarrels (10) 64 Quiver & 20 arrows 84 Spyglass
5 Block and tackle 25 Grappling hook 45 Lock 65 Rope, hemp (50 ft.) 85 Studded leather armour
6 Bottle of wine 26 Hammer 46 Longbow 66 Rope, silk (50 ft.) 86 Sword, bastard
7 Candles (10) 27 Hand axe 47 Mace 67 Sack, large (empty) 87 Sword, long
8 Chain (10 ft.) 28 Hat 48 Manacles 68 Sack, small (empty) 88 Sword, short
9 Chain mail 29 Heavy quarrels (10) 49 Map / scroll case 69 Saddle 89 Sword, 2-handed
10 Club 30 Helmet 50 Mirror, small steel 70 Saddle bag 90 Thieves’ tools
11 Crossbow, heavy 31 Holy symbol, silver 51 Morningstar 71 Scale mail 91 Torches (8)
12 Crossbow, light 32 Holy symbol, wooden 52 Musical instrument 72 Scimitar 92 Rations (1 day)
13 Crowbar 33 Horse barding 53 Oil (1-pint flask) 73 Shield 93 Trident
14 Dagger 34 Hourglass 54 Padded armour 74 Shortbow 94 Warhammer
15 Dagger, silver 35 Ink (1 oz. Vial) 55 Paper (sheet) 75 Silk robe 95 Waterskin
16 Dart 36 Iron spikes (12) 56 Parchment (sheet) 76 Simple meal 96 Winter blanket
17 Flail 37 Javelin 57 Pick, heavy 77 Sling 97 Wolfsbane (fist full)
18 Flail, heavy 38 Ladder, 10-foot 58 Pick, light 78 Sling bullets (10) 98 Wooden chest (empty)
19 Flask (empty) 39 Lance 59 Pick, miner’s 79 Small bell 99 Wooden pole, 10'
20 Holy water (flask) 40 Lantern 60 Plate mail 80 Spade or shovel 00 Wooden stakes (3)

Ring of Appearance Warping
--------------------------
This ring causes the owner's physical appearance, including clothing, to
change both radically and randomly at the beginning of each turn of the
duration. Magical items remain unchanged, as do non-clothing items on
the character's person, but all mundane items of clothing take on a
completely new appearance each turn.
The wearer of the ring has no control over the form his appearance
takes, but may remove the ring at any time to return to normal.
The Referee may use any method to determine the wearer's
random appearances, but the following table may be helpful. One die of
each type listed should be rolled.
Ring of appearance warping, resulting appearance
Die d4 d6 d8 d10
Result Sex Age Dress Features
1 Female Child Messy Missing limb
2 Female Youth Scant Obese
3 Male Adult Immaculate Scrawny
4 Male Mature Formal Muscular
5 Old Threadbare Bald
6 Decrepit Elaborate Hairy
7 Drab Tall
8 Uniform Short
9 Ugly
10 Beautiful

Severed Hand
------------
Also known as a “hand of glory", this item holds great power when used
by a necromancer. The preserved hand of a murderer has been treated
so that it can be ignited and will slowly burn, like a candle.
A hand of glory, when placed by the side of a sleeping person and lit,
causes the victim to be overcome with a permanent paralysis. Persons so
affected typically die of thirst. A save versus paralysis is allowed to resist
the hand's sinister effect.

Shrunken Head
-------------
These gruesome, fist-sized heads have been shrunken by a process of
mummification, and steeped in blood and rare inks. They are often
found in sets of 1d6 heads. In the hands of a necromancer they have
several uses. Each head may only be used once.
Ward: When three or more heads are placed in formation around an
area to be warded, and their magic activated, they will project a powerful
aura of fear. Any living creature coming within 60' of the ward must
make a save versus spells or be overcome with terror and flee as fast as
possible for 1 turn. The ward is effective for 24 hours.
Guardian: A single head may be placed to act as a guardian, its stitched-
shut eyes tearing open. Anyone except the necromancer coming into the
head's field of view will cause it to begin to emit a loud groaning sound.
The guardian head is effective for 24 hours.
Messenger: A head may be instructed to relay a message, either upon
repetition of the correct command word, or when anyone comes into its
presence. The message may be up to 100 words, and is repeated but
once.

Skeleton Key
------------
These magical keys, carved from thin bones, grant access to crypt
doors, bypassing any form of mundane or magical locks, traps or wards.
The keys are only effective in the hands of a necromancer, and each key
can only be used once.

Skeleton Teeth
--------------
These enchanted teeth are usually found as a set of 2d6, either laced
onto a necklace or kept in a pouch. The teeth are typically human, but
may be of any species. When a tooth is taken and thrown onto the
ground, an animated skeleton bearing a sword springs up immediately. If
the person throwing the tooth is a necromancer, he can command the
skeleton to do his bidding. Characters of other classes have a 75%
chance of being able to command the conjured skeleton, otherwise the
creature will turn and attack the one who summoned it. The skeletons
crumble to dust after 6 turns.
